The South African Post Office has announced a new initiative which will allow patients of government clinics to receive their chronic medication at Post Office branches. The mail carrier said this service will be available at its 342 post offices across the country, except for those located in the Western Cape. “The service is aimed at patients who live or work closer to one of these post offices than a Government clinic. Post Offices are open until 17h00 on weekdays and Saturday mornings, allowing much longer hours for collecting medication,” it said. According to the Post Office, queues at its outlets have vastly reduced since the collection point for the R350 Social Relief of Distress grants were moved to supermarkets in May. “Medication can now be collected very quickly and stress-free. Patients of government clinics who would like to collect their medication from their local post office should arrange it with their clinic. “The department of health sends the patient an SMS when the medication is ready for collection and patients have 14 days to collect it before the medication is returned to the department of health.” Expanded services Beyond medication collection, the draft South African Post Office Amendment Bill is expected to rapidly expand the post office’s mandate from simply delivering parcels to providing ‘diversified and expanded services’, including e-commerce and financial services. Published for public comment in April, the bill provides for a range of expanded services that will be offered through the post office, including: Government services;
Agency services;
Financial services;
E-commerce;
Logistics;
Retail;
Authentication services;
Warehousing services;
Serve as a ‘digital hub’ for businesses and communities. The revised mandate also empowers the post office to provide logistics and e-commerce services and serve as a logistics partner for e-commerce and other logistics players. The bill will allow the post office to charge different fees for different services and in certain areas, subject to regulator approval. This is to ensure that the post office can recover services costs and not operate at a loss. “Furthermore, the amendment allows the Post Office to differentiate its service offerings at different post offices and service points based on the needs assessment for a particular area. This is also to ensure the effective and efficient usage and enhancement of services offerings by SAPO to communities,” it said. Read: SARS has introduced a new service charter – here’s what it expects from taxpayers