The Community Active Protection (CAP) initiative, a non-profit security scheme that protects suburbs throughout the North of Johannesburg, has partnered with  Vumacam to expand the latter’s surveillance network. CAP says it works with SAPS to fight crime by apprehending criminals anywhere in Johannesburg. “The Vumacam platform has grown from humble beginnings to become an immensely powerful tool, and we are grateful to have the ability to be able to leverage on this,” said Sean Jammy, CAP’s chief operating officer. “While in isolation CCTV isn’t a silver bullet, as part of a larger intelligence driven operation we have seen massive benefit from Vumacam.” CAP said it has committed to partnering with Vumacam to launch a SafeCity Initiative that will see Vumacam activate an additional 1,850 cameras across the city of which 350 new cameras will be installed in previously unprotected areas. This will instantly boost and fast track the current COJ network from 1 August 2022. The SafeCity initiative will also provide CAP with access to the full network of Vumacam cameras meaning that CAP will now have access to over 6000 cameras to assist with crime prevention and investigations, it said. “The SafeCity Initiative means that you and your loved ones can have additional safety in your neighbourhood streets, ride your bikes in the parks and green spaces without worry of something happening and provide security so that everyone can safely get to and from their homes,” sayid Ricky Croock, Vumacam CEO. “The 350 new cameras will be installed across unprotected areas such as Soweto, Alexandra and Diepsloot and known crime hotspots. It will improve the collaboration between private and public sector by connecting SAPS and CAP through the Eyes and Ears (E2) Fusion Centre which will monitor escalated alerts and deploy SAPS resources to where they are needed most.” In March Vumacam began rolling out its CCTV technology in the City of eThekwini. “The rollout will eventually see surveillance infrastructure installed across all areas of eThekwini, with the first phase consisting of 115 poles going live at critical locations identified with the collaboration of the eThekwini Municipality, Disaster Management Centre, SAPS and the Metro Police,” it said. Read: Bad news for prices in South Africa – including a R2 petrol hike in July