Eskom has announced that stage 6 load shedding will be implemented on Tuesday and Wednesday, following disruptions at power stations. The full schedule is as follows: Tuesday (28 June) Stage 6 load shedding from 16h00 to 22h00
Stage 4 load shedding from 22h00 to 00h00 Wednesday (29 June) Stage 2 load shedding from 00h00 to 05h00
Stage 4 load shedding from 05h00 to 16h00
Stage 6 load shedding from 16h00 to 22h00 This is due to the unlawful and unprotected labour action, which has caused widespread disruption to Eskom’s power plants, it said. “This has compelled Eskom to continue taking precautionary measures to conserve generation capacity and safeguard plant from damage. There is a high risk that the stage of load shedding may have to change at any time, depending on the state of the plant. Eskom continues to closely monitor the system, adjust and communicate any changes as may be necessary. “We appeal to all South Africans to help limit the impact of the shortages by continuing to reduce the usage of electricity and to switch off all non-essential items. Three of the 10 generation units that had tripped during the night have been returned to service. This, however, is still insufficient to stave off the implementation of Stage 6 load shedding for this evening and tomorrow evening.” Eskom said it has 3,218MW on planned maintenance, while another 17,621MW of capacity is unavailable due to breakdowns. “We would like to remind the public that load shedding is implemented only as a last resort to protect the national grid. We, therefore, urge all South Africans to continue using electricity sparingly especially during these uncertain times on the power system.”  Schedules For people living in the major metros, load shedding schedules are available here: City of Johannesburg
City of Ekurhuleni 
City of Tshwane 
City of Cape Town (PDF)
Nelson Mandela Bay
eThekwini
Manguang
Buffalo City For access to other load shedding schedules, Eskom has made them available on loadshedding.eskom.co.za. Smartphone users can also download the app EskomSePush to receive push notifications when load shedding is implemented, as well as the times the area you are in will be off. Read: Prepare for stage 6 load shedding on Tuesday: Eskom CEO