Australian airline Qantas says it will significantly boost its international network from Perth with flights to Johannesburg set to take off later this year. The routes are the latest of eight new international services the national carrier has announced since Australia’s international borders re-opened in November 2021, the group said in a statement. The route is being supported by the Western Australian Government’s Reconnect WA package and Qantas will work with Tourism Western Australia to boost inbound tourism from South Africa into Perth and regional WA, and with the cooperation of Perth Airport. Johannesburg From 1 November, Qantas will operate the only direct service from Perth to South Africa, operating three return flights per week on its Airbus A330 aircraft, Qantas said. It said that the flights will cut more than six hours from the fastest current travel time, with customers heading to Johannesburg from Perth currently having to fly on Qantas via Sydney, or via the Middle East. “With a large South African community in Perth, the flights are expected to be popular with people visiting family and friends as well as business and leisure travellers. The route will also offer convenient one-stop connections for people travelling to and from other Australian cities.” Qantas’ existing four flights per week from Sydney to Johannesburg on its Boeing 787 aircraft have had strong bookings since they recommenced in January this year and will increase to daily from 30 October, the airline said. “International travel demand continues to rebound as people make up for two years of closed borders. Our direct flights from Perth to London and Rome are selling really strongly, which gives us the confidence to add new routes from our western hub,” said Qantas Group CEO Alan Joyce. “There’s a big South African population that lives in Western Australia and this will be great for people travelling in both directions to see family and friends. It will also help support the economic ties between Australia and South Africa.” Fares for Perth-Johannesburg flights go on sale today starting from $1,800 (R19,800) return, Qantas said. Read: Comair grounds kulula and British Airways flights