A new report by business solutions company Expert Market shows Tesla chief executive Elon Musk is wrong about working from home. The world’s richest man weighed in on the return-to-office debate earlier this month on Twitter by expanding on a leaked email sent to Tesla staff members. Musk wrote that remote work is ‘no longer acceptable’ and anyone who wishes to do remote work must be in the office for a minimum of 40 hours per week or leave the car company. Responding to a Twitter follower who asked about the email and what his thoughts were on remote work Musk said – “They should pretend to work somewhere else”.  However, Expert Market’s survey of CEOs and founders from 125 European and North American companies shows that working from home has largely been beneficial for both businesses and workers. It found that 92% saw positive benefits of flexible working options, with only 16% reporting negative impacts. 94% of executives said they will continue working in a hybrid/remote way. Only 7% of the hybrid companies aim to eventually return to the office full time in the next couple of years, while the remaining 93% will continue in a hybrid way. Almost three out of four (74%) of the fully remote companies Expert Market spoke to stated that they will stay remote. 22% will move to a hybrid way of working, and 4% aim to return to the office in the next year. Only 16% of respondents said that there were negative impacts of hybrid/remote working, including: Isolation has an impact on employee mental health (6%);
Tech/communication issues (2%);
Issues with employees overworking (2%);
Missed office culture/relationships (2%). “It’s hardly surprising that businesses are keen to keep their flexible working practices considering the improvements in employee productivity and happiness, and a better work-life balance. “It seems that the workplace changes brought on by the pandemic have helped businesses and employers better understand how to get the most out of their employees; essentially, by giving employees more control over where and how they work best,” said Chloe Mayo, editor of Expert Market. Read: South Africa is making a big localisation push – and has stopped using some international products: Ramaphosa