Cyber threats are on the rise and becoming more sophisticated, which has made it increasingly complex for companies to assess or detect weaknesses and risks in their networks. BlueVision IT Management (BITM) is a South African home-grown multinational company that helps businesses with early intervention and cyber security threat detection. Click here to learn more about cyber security solutions from BITM. BITM does this by connecting the science of technology with cyber security through industry-leading frameworks, services, products, and solutions. BITM’s vision is to deliver practical and effective services that centre around its clients’ business objectives, and it offers a range of products and services to its clients. BITM has a number of cyber security sensors that keep your business safe from malicious activity through threat detection and monitoring. These sensors provide industry-specific cyber security situational awareness to assist in early threat detection, with BITM’s flagship sensor focusing on the detection of rogue IoT gateways and devices. BITM’s sensors allow your business to keep up with the retail industry’s growing demand for compliance – such as PCI DSS – to ensure protection for clients making use of IoT and improve their shopping experience. BITM brings a fresh perspective to the market by offering professional detection and response services that focus on identifying weaknesses and risks in your organisation – allowing you to fix them before they become a problem. Its internationally-recognised strategic services are based on efficiency and effectiveness, and include the following: Offensive Security – Red team exercises, awareness simulations, OSINT assessments, vulnerability assessments, and penetration testing.
Incident Response – Incident response, CSIRT/SOC establishment, SIEM and EDR setup.
Consulting Services – vCISO services, governance, risk, compliance, security architecture design, framework implementation , and security assessments. These services strengthen its clients’ cyber security posture, reduce risks, and increase compliance with international standards. BITM has also achieved lots of recognition for these offerings, and they have contributed to popular cyber security events like the SANReN 2021 Cyber Security Challenge. BITM strives to ensure that its products and solutions are aligned to the needs of its customers and to industry standards, which is showcased by its CREST (Council of Registered Ethical Security Testers) accreditation and its IoTSF membership. CREST is a non-profit accreditation body that has established professional standards for penetration testing, incident response as well as vulnerability assessments. BITM’s CREST accreditation is impressive because CREST represents companies that are recognised as offering the highest quality and most professional network or website penetration testing. BITM’s credentials are further enhanced by its Internet of Things Security Foundation (IoTSF) membership. The IoTSF is a non-profit global membership organisation that is focused on ensuring IoT solutions abide by the highest security expectations. It is the natural destination for IoT users and technology providers looking to set themselves apart as cyber security and IoT market leaders. BITM believes the success of its business is built on the fact they have the best professionals in the industry. Its business is built on three core pillars which ensure that it is: practical, impactful, and creating value. These experts are equipped to help businesses solve their complex industry-specific challenges with solutions from BITM’s two divisions – products and services. BITM’s product division is based in Vancouver, Canada, and develops unique cyber security situational awareness sensors to detect industry-specific cyber security-related activities. The service division is based in South Africa, and its goal is to identify and minimise the cyber security weaknesses and risks of businesses’ cyber security controls. When you work with BITM, you therefore know you will receive the best service in the industry. Click here to learn more about cyber security solutions from BITM.