The Gauteng provincial government is planning a complete revamp of its driving licence centres as it looks to adopt new technologies and cut down on wait times, says public transport and roads infrastructure head Jacob Mamabolo. Speaking at the launch of the new licence centre at the Midrand Gautrain station on Thursday (9 June), Mamabolo said that these new centres will serve as the blueprint for future developments – including fully online and cashless services. He added that the ideal goal would be to have similar facilities in shopping malls across the province. The centre is part of four new stations set to be delivered by the provincial government together with the Gautrain Management Agency and the Road Traffic Management Corporation to add capacity that will help address driver license card renewal backlogs in Gauteng. “The pilot centre, which was built using alternative building materials, is completely off the grid, guaranteeing customers minimal disruptions and a quick, convenient service along the Gautrain line,” Mamabolo said. Through the use of smart technologies, the new centre promises to halve the time it takes for customers to complete the process of renewing the validity of their driving licence cards, he said. “This additional capacity will make it more convenient for customers to access services. Last year, we introduced two new smart DLTCs at Waterfall Estate, City of Joburg and Eco Park in the City of Tshwane. These new generation DLTCs are the benchmark we are setting ourselves as we look at modernising all our facilities across the province.” The centres will operate from 08h00 – 17h00 from Monday – Friday, and from 09h00 – 15h00 on Saturday and Sunday.  The national government is working on its own initiatives to adopt new technologies and cut wait times for driving licences across the country. Responding to parliamentary questions in March, Transport minister Fikile Mbalula said the design for the new driving licence card has now been completed and is undergoing a cabinet approval process. Mbalula has previously mooted the possibility of incorporating identification features in South Africa’s licences and in a February media briefing he said the country’s new driving card will feature a number of security enhancements and international recognition – meaning it can be used as a form of identification. Once the physical licence card has been introduced, the government also plans to introduce an electric driving licence which will available through a motorist’s smartphone. With the introduction of the eDL, the motorist will have an option to apply for a physical card and electronic driver’s licence which will be accessible through a motorist’s mobile phone. Read: Cape Town plans to build a ‘sky circle’ to help ease traffic