BMC’s Control-M is an enterprise-capable workflow orchestration platform that is provides organisations the ability to simplify their data pipelines from creation through to processing and delivering key insights for your business decision making process. This allows enterprises to access data-driven insights faster and at scale using data from multiple sources across cloud platforms and on-premises sources. Click here to learn how Blue Turtle can help you implement Control-M. “Control-M gives you the ability to automate and orchestrate the ingestion of data from a multitude of sources whether legacy or new technology platforms, store and process it quickly, with powerful integration capabilities delivering core insights needed to improve your business processes and accelerate application delivery,” said Harry Nicholson, Senior Product Manager of Automation at Blue Turtle – a BMC partner. “Control-M as a workload automation solution, brings an enterprise-capable application workflow orchestration platform to the table that enables you to automate your big data and data pipelines seamlessly. All with the goal to deliver key data-driven insights faster and at scale.” “With the ability to simplify application and data workflows, organisations can now drive agile Devops and DataOps practices with a platform of their choice, and with this process automated it takes the manual work from the employees, allowing them to focus on innovation and other key business growth areas” he said. Organisations can leverage some of the following benefits through Control-M: An automated platform solution across all data streams, ensuring a robust and reliable application workflow orchestration with native integration with enterprise applications, databases, and cloud services.
Built in predictive analytics and automated alerts provide organisations monitoring capabilities to detect problem and issues early on allowing for a quicker a quicker resolution or reduced Mean Time to Repair
Control-M provides complete visibility and full management of all data pipelines regardless of which big data/BI/databases technologies are used. “We are seeing a clear move within the Retail and Financial sector with our Control-M clients moving towards becoming more data-driven businesses” says Michael Hutchinson – Blue Turtle Technologies Coastal Business Manager. Control-M simplifies application and data workflow orchestration on premises or as a service. It makes it easy to build, define, schedule, manage, and monitor production workflows, ensuring visibility, reliability, and improving SLAs. BMC Control-M was named a leader in the EMA Radar Report for Workload Automation: Q4 2021 report and outmatched other competitors through the below evaluations of the solution: Functionality
Deployment and administration
Architecture and integration
Vendor strength Blue Turtle is the leading BMC partner in South Africa, and has over 100 years of experience between its technical consultants. This allows the organization to help you implement Control-M quickly and effectively without needing to go through BMC’s global channels. Blue Turtle also leverages its unrivalled experience to offer Control-M training, so your employees can become certified in this powerful technology. “From a services point of view, we’ve got the full package,” said Nicholson. Click here to learn how Blue Turtle can help you implement Control-M.