Sophos’ firewall buyer’s guide is an invaluable document that helps end users make wise choices when considering the deployment of a firewall. Areas to consider are the four must-have critical capabilities (TLS 1.3 inspection, Zero-day threat protection, FastPath application acceleration; and integration with other security products), core firewall capabilities, complementary firewall products, management capabilities, and deployment options. Click here to learn more about Duxbury Networking. “The following technologies are also essential components of any firewall solution.” “Most of these capabilities are mature, well-established staples in any firewall, so vendors are often differentiated based on ease of management and the level of actionable visibility they provide,” says Andre Kannemeyer – CTO at Duxbury Networking, local distributors of Sophos technology. Be sure that your next firewall not only includes these features, but provides easy management – and more importantly, greater visibility into risks and issues in each of these areas. The following complementary products may be important to extend your network and protection where it’s needed. Make sure your vendor of choice offers these additional products and makes them easy to integrate with your firewall, either managed directly from the firewall and/or through the same central management console as the firewall. “Firewall products are often differentiated by how easy they are to manage.” “Many firewalls that have been on the market for decades suffer from having new capabilities bolted onto the product over time using different user interface concepts that make every section of the product seem like a completely different product,” says Kannemeyer. The following capabilities can make a huge difference in the deployment and day-to-day management. Another important consideration for your next firewall is how easily it will integrate into your network both today and down the road. You want a firewall that fits your network, not one that demands your network fit the firewall. “Ensure your vendor offers a variety of deployment options including public cloud platform support such as AWS and Azure, as well as popular virtualisation platforms, and flexible, modular hardware appliance options,” says Kannemeyer. For more information contact Duxbury Networking, +27 (0) 11 351 9800, info@duxnet.co.za, www.duxbury.co.za