Discovery Bank has announced several new features which are being rolled out to its clients – including changes for Vitality Travel and a pay-as-you-go gym option. In a notice on Monday (20 June), the bank said that it now has over one million accounts since its public launch in 2020, and has recorded strong deposit growth over the last year. “The bank has scaled quickly and built a uniquely powerful digital banking and technology capability,” said chief executive Hylton Kallner “This is now being deployed as the de facto operating system for the Discovery Group in South Africa. Discovery Bank’s digital payments technology, advanced security features and shared value rewards capabilities represent a unique opportunity to deliver new products and digital services to all of our clients.” Some of the new features that the bank plans to introduce include: Vitality Travel Vitality Travel was launched in March 2022 and offers a single booking platform that incorporates travel partners, discounts, and other travel services through Discovery Bank. “Since its launch, in the short space of four months, Discovery Bank clients are saving on average 31% per flight. With the complete rewards and personalised experiences that Vitality Travel offers, Discovery Bank makes travel as convenient and relaxing as possible for all Discovery clients.” The following new benefits are now available for Discovery Bank clients: Access to The Lounge, a partnership between Discovery Bank and SAA, which offers clients an elevated pre-flight experience with upgraded comforts to refuel body and mind, such as premium coffee and drinks. As an introductory offer, clients with Platinum, Black or Purple Discovery Cards can enjoy unlimited use of The Lounge until the end of 2022 at OR Tambo (domestic and international departures), Cape Town and King Shaka airports. In addition to domestic departures at OR Tambo and Cape Town airports, Priority Fast Track is now also available at international arrivals at OR Tambo International airport for Discovery Bank Purple Card holders. SAA and CemAir will also join the Vitality Travel flight partner network, complementing Safair, Airlink and LIFT to complete a full offering of discounted flights on all SA domestic and regional flights. The Vitality Travel platform accommodation listings now also give access to properties listed on Booking.com at their best available rates. Vitality Pay-as-you-Gym Discovery Bank will offer Vitality Pay-as-you-Gym to all clients, including those with a Discovery Account. “It’s easy to use and clients can access more than 170 Virgin Active and Planet Fitness clubs nationwide. Clients simply go to a club, scan the QR code at the entrance, seamlessly pay the access fee of between R75 and R100 (depending on the facility) from either a Discovery Bank transaction account, credit card or using Discovery Miles, and enjoy their workout,” the bank said. “As an introductory special offer, Discovery clients can make unlimited use of Vitality Pay-as-you-Gym for free between 20 June and 31 July 2022 and get a free smoothie after their first visit.” Discovery Account Discovery clients who don’t already have a bank account, now have access to the Discovery Account. This is a fully digital banking account at zero monthly fees, that is easy to activate; clients can access their full Discovery product portfolio in the app and also have access to these benefits: The Vitality Travel booking platform and its unique rewards with a 10% saving on local and international flights (up to 35% for Vitality Health members) on all domestic and regional flights – including Airlink, FlySafair, LIFT, South African Airways and CemAir – as well as on accommodation and car hire. The platform also includes access to properties and the best available rates on Booking.com so that clients can book everything in one place, with the option of paying with Discovery Miles and using the benefits of Vitality Travel servicing. A Discovery Miles Account where clients can track and save the Discovery Miles that they earn across their Discovery products (including their Vitality Health and Vitality Drive benefits). Clients can convert their Miles into cash and they automatically qualify for up to 15% off when they spend Discovery Miles – doubling to up to 30% off on Miles Ð-Day (on the 15th of every month). Discovery Pay, the digital payments capability for real-time payments. This includes Health Pay whereby Discovery Health Medical Scheme members can integrate payments for out-of-pocket medical expenses. Members can instantly settle any out-of-pocket expenses at participating GPs, pharmacies, hospitals, pathologists, radiologists, and other healthcare providers directly from a linked Discovery Bank account. Read: South Africa is heading for bigger-than-expected interest rate hikes: Standard Bank