The Department of Transport is considering a complete overhaul of its traffic fine system – including how fines are collected and the severity of certain offences. The planned changes are included in a revised white paper published by the department at the end of May. The department noted that while the issuing of fines is a key part of the traffic system, problems in recent years have contributed to ‘a lack of respect for the law’ prevailing among a large percentage of South African drivers. To address these and other issues, the department is now considering: Decriminalisation: The decriminalisation of certain traffic offences to ensure that the process of adjudicating traffic offences will be brief, strict and decisive. The feasibility of decriminalising all traffic offences except reckless, negligent and inconsiderate driving will be investigated. Standardisation and dedicated traffic courts: The department plans to move towards the further standardisation of fines and other arrangements made by the judiciary, including the possible introduction of dedicated special traffic courts. Schools: The department is considering the introduction of compulsory attendance at traffic schools as a form of sanction. Change in how fines are collected: Fine-collection procedures relating to traffic offences, penalties for non-payment, confiscation of movable property and demerit systems will be improved and fully implemented, the department said. It also plans to explore the ‘desirability’ of separate national and provincial road-traffic management funds will be considered instead of fines accruing to individual authorities and general state or provincial revenue funds. Ramp up in enforcement: Fine-collection procedures relating to traffic offences, penalties for non-payment, confiscation of movable property and demerit systems will be improved and fully implemented, the department said. The department also indicated that it plans to go on a massive education programme to ensure all South Africans are up to date with the latest rules and changes. “Resources will be made available for the enhancement of road-user knowledge, skills and attitudes, including education within a formal educational setting from an early age, non-formal education in non-educational organisations, and informal education where media such as radio, television, posters and pamphlets are used,” it said. “All categories of road users will systematically be exposed to a purposeful programme targeted at enhancing their knowledge, skills and attitudes, at promoting their voluntary compliance with the law, and at developing community ownership and participation in enhancing road-traffic quality.” Read: The cars being targeted by hijackers in South Africa right now