Unlawful industrial action at various Eskom power stations has impacted planned maintenance and repairs, and at some stations, the full complement of workers has not reported for duty. As a result, stage 4 load shedding will continue to be implemented, says Eskom. “Eskom regrets to inform the public that stage 4 load shedding is anticipated to continue from 05h00 on Monday morning until midnight at least until Wednesday. This is due to unlawful and unprotected labour action at a number of power stations, which has caused delays in carrying out planned maintenance and repairs. Furthermore, at a number of power stations, the full staff complement has not reported for duty,” the power utility said. “As a result, unplanned generation losses have not been reduced as planned, which has compelled Eskom to continue taking precautionary measures to conserve generation capacity and safeguard plant from damage. There is a possibility that the stage of load shedding may have to change at short notice, depending on the state of the plant and the availability of labour.”Approximately 4,000MW of generation capacity is at risk due to the illegal strike action. It is, therefore, necessary to replenish emergency generation reserves to be able to react to unforeseen circumstances, Eskom said. “Adequate emergency reserves are crucial to assist with the generation deficit while dealing with generating units that may trip owing to unlawful action, and to compensate for the inability to return generating units timeously to service.” The power utility warned that protracted strike actions may lead to further damage and prolonged delays to returning units to service, which would compound an already constrained power system. “We currently have 3,894MW on planned maintenance, while another 15 472MW of capacity is unavailable due to breakdowns. In addition to this, a further 600MW is unavailable due to a line fault in Mozambique that is currently experienced by the Hydroelectrica de Cahora Bassa (HCB).”  Eskom said it continues to closely monitor the system, and adjust and communicate any changes as may be necessary. The power utility appealed to its labour partners and striking employees to put the people of  South Africa first, respect the law and to desist from unlawful and undemocratic conduct. “The labour dispute resolution process must be allowed to run its course without illegal acts of intimidation and damage to property. Eskom will consider all legal options at its disposal for damage caused or incited by union representatives.” Schedules For people living in the major metros, load shedding schedules are available here: City of Johannesburg
City of Ekurhuleni 
City of Tshwane 
City of Cape Town (PDF)
Nelson Mandela Bay
eThekwini
Manguang
Buffalo City For access to other load shedding schedules, Eskom has made them available on loadshedding.eskom.co.za. Smartphone users can also download the app EskomSePush to receive push notifications when load shedding is implemented, as well as the times the area you are in will be off. Read: Eskom warns of stage 5 load shedding or higher due to strike action