MTN Business believes that cyber security is one of the most important considerations for South African businesses as digital attacks can bring down your entire business. This can cause extensive financial losses and will reduce customer satisfaction if they cannot access your services. CISOs are the people most responsible for the security and privacy of their business’s data, which is why MTN Business sees them as gatekeepers and crucial strategic business enablers. Click here to learn more about MTN Business cyber security products Businesses that need to reinforce their competitive position must recognise the value of the Information Security if they want to succeed. This is why MTN offers an extensive range of cyber security products and services that support these efforts. MTN Business’s cyber security suite comprises four key categories and provides comprehensive functionality to businesses. Each of these categories includes an extensive range of products that combine seamlessly to provide a robust solution to your cyber security needs. Enterprise Security Operations and Service – solutions that help your IT security and IT operations teams work together to increase protection and reduce risk. Comprises SIEM, SOAR, ITSM, incident case management, and threat intel and sharing.
System, Vulnerability, Configuration, and Compliance Management – this makes it easier to manage your cyber security efforts and detect potential issues. These solutions include vulnerability management, compliance management, discovery, baseline assessments, and remediation assistance.
Network Security –enables robust and effective protection of your various business networks, including high-level managed next generation firewalls, SASE (CASB, SWG, ZTNA, etc), XDR, and anti-DDOS.
Workforce (Users and Devices) –protects your business from employee-related security risks with email security, end point protection, end point detection and response, and MDM. MTN Business believes that South African enterprises should implement a comprehensive range of products that complement each other for a superior cyber security system. This is because if one area of your business is compromised, the entire business is compromised. If you would like to learn more about this range of MTN Business products and solutions, click here to contact MTN Business. MTN believes that successful CISOs must prioritise zero trust models to secure their networks and protect their businesses. Zero trust models see both external and internal traffic as unsafe by default, and verify everything before allowing access. This model ensures that businesses are at a much lower risk of allowing unsafe traffic to be transmitted across their network. MTN Business’s comprehensive cyber security services help your CISO prioritise building a zero-trust network. “When advising our clients about deploying, implementing, and maintaining a zero-trust network, MTN Business begins by identifying the product surface and mapping transaction flows,” said MTN Business Head of Enterprise, Paul Jolliffe. “MTN Business will then build the architecture and implement the appropriate policies and procedures as part of ongoing maintenance to ensure a consistently high level of security.” Click here to learn more about MTN Business cyber security products