The mobile development industry is evolving at an unbelievable speed. In fact, the global mobile development market size is expected to grow at a considerable compound annual growth rate of 11.5% from 2020 to 2027. Click here to find out more about Hyperia’s offerings Today, the use of smart devices is the key to digital success. It transforms business and operating models and marketplaces at an astonishing rate. To survive in this digital era, it’s important to get familiar with the changing trends. In 2022, we’re seeing increasingly more advances in artificial intelligence, especially in the mobile industry. Some AI software that is already available include Siri, Alexa, and Google Assistant. Now, regular mobile applications are starting to implement voice recognition AI software to enhance the user experience. This promotes efficiency and improves hands-free use. With voice recognition, AI is also used to bridge translation gaps. Understanding users’ voices help marketers learn more about their market. As a result, they can target users more precisely and increase revenue with relevant and more targeted advertisements. Machine learning is another compelling field in which there is revolutionary things happening. Apple is one of the key players in ML. Its highly intelligent ML models have allowed developers to build immersive new experiences. 5G is fast transforming the world of connectivity. And this technology is only set to change the way mobile applications are used and created more and more. In 2021, there were globally around 3.5 times more 5G connections compared to 2020. Connections are expected to triple throughout 2022. But what exactly does this mean for mobile device and mobile app development? Both speed and efficiency will improve drastically. Compared to 4G, 5G offers connections up to 100 times faster. The adoption of 5G will ultimately boost the way mobile apps work. This will enable developers to add new features to applications without affecting the performance. Many mobile telecommunications providers in South Africa are already looking at rolling out more affordable 5G deals to consumers. For example, Telkom has deployed some 5G sites in parts of the country and is now optimising the user experience ahead of a bigger roll-out. Telkom is the fourth mobile operator to launch 5G after Vodacom, Rain and MTN. Look out for Telkom deals on 5G as it’s being rolled out. IoT technology is not a new concept. However, the rise in mobile adoption across a large range of sectors has created endless opportunities for this technology. The IoT involves a growing network of devices that are all connected to the Internet, bringing more convenience and automated control to users. A perfect example of the rise in IoT and mobile tech development is smart home technology that allows users to manage and control certain aspects of their homes remotely. It is expected that there will be an increase in wearable mobile tech, including smart watches and glasses, fitness bracelets and healthcare monitors. These devices will be paired and used in combination with mobile apps. The idea is that consumers will track certain information in just a few clicks from a mobile phone, no matter where they are. In 2021, Facebook announced that they are changing their name to Meta. As one of the leading companies in the world revealed their intention to focus on the metaverse, mobile and mobile app developers will also need to change their priorities. The metaverse is an interconnected set of digital spaces that allows users to escape into a virtual world. The only limits are the rules of technology. The metaverse is one of the most innovative new trends in tech and mobile is possibly going to be the primary platform for it. In 2022 and further into the future, mobile device and app developers will need to review whether their products are ready for integration with different metaverses. Current mobile trends prove that technology continues to penetrate ever deeper into our lives. Mobile development follows the latest innovations and offers powerful and convenient solutions. Businesses focus on mobile to attract more customers, while consumers expect more services to be available via mobile devices. It is expected that smartphone tech will only evolve as creators continue to come up with innovative, forward-thinking solutions to consumers’ everyday problems. Find out more about Hyperia’s offerings here.