In our previous articles, we unpacked the trend of businesses moving to Mac and showed the key reasons for this included compatibility and affordability. These articles have made it clear that Apple MacBooks are the best laptops for business use. There is one MacBook supplier that then stands out from the rest thanks to its flexible and affordable deals, as well as the wide variety of services and support it offers – iStore Business. Learn more about the deals iStore Business offers. At iStore Business, we are passionate about unlocking the full power of Apple in the workplace – both for SMMEs and large enterprises – which is why we make it easy for your business to adopt the best technology on the market. iStore Business offers a wide variety of services and support that will make your transition to a MacBook-powered office, and the subsequent running of these MacBooks, seamless. By partnering with us, your business receives the following benefits: Device deployment
Security and device protection
End-user and technical support
Mobile device management
Affordability solutions We can also help you integrate powerful software from vendors like Acronis, AWS, VMware, and Cisco into your MacBook ecosystem – ensuring you have all the tools you need at your disposal. Your business will benefit from unmatched trade-in value, too – and you can even trade in your non-Apple laptops and benefit from iStore Business’s R4,000 minimum trade in value.* If your business would like to reduce the initial outlay costs of moving your employees to MacBooks, our business rental deals are then an excellent choice from a procurement perspective. “At iStore Business we are all about the complete solution,” said iStore Business GM, Sudesh Pillay. “Not only is our team ready to assist you with upgrading your fleet to the latest products at the most affordable prices, but we’ll assist you with up-skilling your IT team, ensure that your data is safe and protected, reduce costs and increase productivity,” said Pillay. “Our team is ready to assist you – so reach out for a free assessment and quote” Our desire to help businesses move their workforce onto Mac does not stop there, however, and we offer a Buy and Try solution to prospective clients. This allows businesses to try an Apple MacBook for 90 days and test the extensive range of features they offer. This includes seeing how well the devices integrate into your work environment. If you’re not satisfied, you can receive a full refund. Here’s how it works: Prior to your trial, we will conduct an app gap analysis where we look at your business’s apps needs and usage to ensure compatibility and a smooth adoption process. In our experience, businesses are always exceptionally pleased with their MacBooks. In fact, over 100 companies have tried this service since inception – with not one unit having been returned to date. Learn more about the deals iStore Business offers.