If you run an SME and are struggling with cash flow, there are several funding options available to you. These options give you access to finance to grow your business with the necessary equipment, facilities, and solutions. Click here to view Cash Flow Capital’s SME funding solutions. Below we detail the top three funding options your SME should consider. Working capital finance is a short-term funding solution that SMEs can use to solve cash flow issues. This form of funding is designed to boost the cash flow available to your business so you can undertake important growth projects – like a bigger contract or investing in a new market. This funding usually comes with repayment terms spanning up to 12 months and is repayable either daily or weekly via debit order. The best working capital finance solutions offer transparent pricing and use risk-based assessments to give you the best funding experience. The best financiers can also offer you access to trade finance solutions. This product is designed to help your business purchase stock and fund procurement of the necessary materials to sustain your operational cycle. This eases your daily cash flow challenges and makes it easier to fulfil all your orders timeously. SMEs that want to be successful need access to business-critical assets. Asset-backed finance solutions allow this, as they provide you with the capital you need to acquire the appropriate assets without compromising on your cash flow. This is enabled by using your existing assets as collateral, which gives the financier peace of mind that their investment is covered while ensuring that your working capital can be used to grow your business in other areas. Cash Flow Capital is a dynamic financier that specialises in offering all of these cash flow solutions to SMEs. Its dedicated team makes it easy for South African SMEs to access quick and simple funding that helps them grow their businesses. Cash Flow Capital’s secured and unsecured solutions have payment windows ranging from 4-36 months, and you can choose between daily and weekly debit order fixed repayments. Funding applications take just five minutes online, and a 24-hour approval process then ensures you get access to the necessary funding quickly. Cash Flow Capital won’t restrict the use of funds to specific purposes, either, and if you settle your advance early, you get significant discounts. Contact one of Cash Flow Capital’s helpful account managers today and begin building a relationship that will take your business to new heights.