In our previous article, we discussed how Apple MacBooks are compatible with all your business apps and needs. There is another key reason why MacBook is the best laptop for business use, though, and that is they are far more affordable than PC alternatives in terms of their total cost of ownership. Learn more about iStore Business’s range of MacBook deals. This was determined in a comprehensive Forrester study conducted in 2021. Forrester’s study found that over a three-year period, companies were saving $635 (R9850) per Mac in support and operational costs. This is because Apple’s zero-touch deployment process and mobile device management (MDM) features were found to make a fleet of Macs more cost-effective to deploy and easier to support than PCs. Each Mac also cost the business an average of $207.75 (R3222) less in hardware and software expenses than a comparable PC – with Apple’s M1 chip ensuring MacBooks were far more suited to the needs of employees than equally-priced PCs. The superior build quality of MacBook hardware contributed to this result, too, as businesses that use MacBooks are far less likely to suffer hardware failure of components like microphones, cameras, and internal components. The report additionally noted that Macs incur no operating system or software maintenance costs, while the in-depth security features that come as standard with MacBooks negated the need for certain endpoint security licences – and reduced the risk of a data breach by 50%. Finally, the study found that M1 Macs reduced device start-up times by 80% and increased employee productivity enough to give each Mac user an additional 104 hours of productivity per year – which offered tremendous value to these businesses. At iStore Business, our experiences align with the results of the Forrester study – our clients save significantly when switching to Mac. We conducted our own study with one of our clients and found they were paying just R250 per month in support costs per Mac, whereas their equivalent PC support costs had ranged from R400 to R500 per month. Additionally, we save our clients money through our trade-in programme – as MacBooks hold much higher residual value than PCs – and we offer the best rates on the market. We guarantee a minimum buyback of 30% after 3 years, which means that investing in the Mac ecosystem will save you money in the medium-to-long term. We even offer prospective clients who currently use PCs a guaranteed R4,000 trade-in value for their devices – as detailed here iStore Business also provides a range of benefits that optimise your spend, including: Flexible rentals – From 1 month to 48 months.
Free 90-day remote technical support.
App gap analysis – iStore Business ensures all your existing apps are compatible with Mac. In the final article of this series, we will explain how iStore Business supplements the incredible value of Apple’s MacBook range with great deals and comprehensive support. Learn more about iStore Business’s range of MacBook deals.