If you are currently involved in the job market, take note – there is a prominent management consulting firm that is doing business differently. Click here to find out more about the available positions at Monocle. Company culture may not immediately come to mind when you picture a career in the world of consulting. Most firms attempt to entice aspiring management consultants with financial rigour, industry experience and hybrid work options. Leading consulting firm, Monocle Solutions, does all of this, but they also know that potential hires are more frequently seeking out companies that strike a dynamic balance between work life and social life. For some, it may come as a surprise that annual events, breakfasts, sports clubs, and spa days can sway the decision-making of prospective employees. And yet, these are just some of the perks that are convincing the top consulting talent to choose Monocle. CEO and founder of Monocle, David Buckham, explains: “We believe that it is essential to the productivity, efficiency and the health of these high-performance individuals to have a balanced lifestyle.” “Therefore, there is an emphasis placed on sport and culture as ways for us to interact with each other, allowing for diverse opportunities and experiences.” Although Monocle champions culture and sport, make no mistake, the firm still has a prominent financial backbone, working as a change project execution partner for some of the most prestigious blue-chip banks and insurance companies in South Africa and abroad. The company is headquartered in South Africa and has subsidiaries in the UK and in Europe, providing employees with the opportunities to gain multifaceted client exposure and access to international markets. The company’s presence abroad can be attributed to their sustained success and continued expansion within South Africa as well as in the UK and Europe. Just late last year, Monocle had a highly effective mass recruitment drive, and this year they are continuing to hire highly skilled, young working professionals to keep up with their growth. Notably, this development has continued throughout the pandemic years, even as economies were shut down and stagnated. “We encourage exceptional performance so that we deliver world-class value to our customers.” “This has led to a remarkable take-up of our services, to the extent that demand has driven fantastic growth at Monocle, allowing us to succeed in challenging economic environments,” explains Willie Ehlers, Monocle’s COO. These trying circumstances have demanded flexibility from companies across the globe, and many have resorted to hybrid working models. At Monocle, whether employees work overseas or work from home, the company aims to cater to each employee’s unique needs. “We provide hybrid working conditions as well as a world-class office environment.” “Employees can choose between the two or make use of both. Right now, employees are also equipped with ergonomic chairs, laptop stands, screens and other accessories in their homes, as well as accommodated during loadshedding hours,” says Patrick Byrne, Monocle’s Senior Executive of People and Culture. Consultants do, however, require more than comfortable chairs and weekly sports events to survive in the ever-changing realm of financial services. The ideal consultant is someone who has tenacity, is eager to learn new skills, and has a ‘can-do’ attitude. These are all traits that Monocle strongly emphasises when hiring, according to Ehlers, who is at the forefront of the recruitment drive. Yet, Monocle does not just expect excellence without adding their own input. The company is actively involved in upskilling its employees and is well known for its extensive training, mentorship program and investment from the company’s executives. Monocle also provides scaffolding for those seeking to improve their education through various certificates and professional qualifications. Overall, Monocle is forward-thinking as they actively encourage employees to meditate on the future and offer personalised growth plans, affording employees the chance to “level up from Analyst to Executive”. “We strongly believe in the full magnitude of the human experience, and we never allow ourselves to be limited by definitions such as Quantitative Analysist, Business Analyst or Data Engineer.” “We believe that in an ideal world every person should be able to experience the full, diverse range of these experiences,” adds Ehlers. The future at Monocle, according to its executives, is boundless. “Our unique position is that we are not an audit-firm, nor an IT-firm, instead we are self-owned and self-driven, offering a cutting-edge experience to world-class customers without limitations,” reveals Buckham. For budding consultants, Monocle Solutions provides a kaleidoscope of convincing reasons to choose their firm, from sports clubs to executive engagement, training courses, blue-chip clients, diverse projects, reliable career growth and overseas opportunities. If you are a top-performing candidate, with the traits that the company is looking for, then you may be tailormade for Monocle. Click here to find out more about the available positions at Monocle.