Interpol’s African Cyberthreat Assessment Report for 2021 found that, Cyber-attacks cost South Africa R2.2 billion per annum. In March this year, it was reported that a major credit bureau fell victim to a cyber-attack that compromised the information of 3 million people. Click here for more information about Santam These incidents prove the threat of cybercrime has become so pervasive to the extent that an Accenture report on digital safety found that South Africa experiences roughly 577 malware-attacks per hour. Hybrid work has heightened vulnerabilities as people’s lives become increasingly interconnected. The pandemic accelerated remote work, which has arguably outpaced the requisite cyber security, as people and their devices migrate between the security of their offices and the relative insecurity of their homes. Phillipa Wild of Santam, says, “Since the pandemic started, we have seen a spike in cybercrime. A contributing factor is that more people are working from home and connecting back to the office without using VPNs.” “It has become trickier to detect when data has been compromised – gone are the days of a virus showing up as a blue screen with a smiley face! Now a trojan or piece of malware lurks unseen in the system, ‘sleeping’ or actively extracting data for an external source.” If you want to ensure the safety of your business’ confidential information, it is crucial that you take the following steps: Falling prey to a cyber-attack can have a potentially fatal impact on any business. The average small business hack can cost your company anywhere between R50 000 to R250 000, if not more, to recover from and if your organisation is found to have not complied with POPI regulations then the fine can be significant. It is important to consider good cyber risk management practices as well as appropriate cyber insurance cover, often available as a package in the market. This will help protect your business against losses such as business interruption, ransomware and forensic costs, caused by a malware attack.