Due to the ongoing unprotected labour action, Eskom says it has been compelled to take precautionary actions to conserve emergency generation reserves. As a result, load shedding will be moved to stage 4 from 11h00 on Friday (24 June) until 00h00. On Saturday and Sunday, stage 4 loadshedding will be implemented from 05h00 until 00h00. “It is necessary to bolster emergency generation reserves to react to unforeseen circumstances, as well as to replenish emergency reserves to prepare for the week ahead. This would help fill the generation deficit while dealing with generating units that may trip amidst the disturbances and compensate for the inability to return generating units timeously to service,” the power utility said. “While exploring possible solutions to unlock the deadlock with the unions, Eskom appeals to its labour partners and striking employees to embrace the higher purpose of putting the people of South Africa first, respect the law and to desist from illegal and undemocratic conduct.” However, Eskom warned that as the shortage of generation capacity persists, the system will continue to be constrained with an elevated risk of load shedding over the coming weeks. The utility said that it continues to closely monitor the system, adjust and communicate any changes as may be necessary. “We appeal to all South Africans to help limit the impact of the shortages by continuing to reduce the usage of electricity and to switch off all non-essential items. We currently have 2 766MW on planned maintenance, while another 17.395MW of capacity is unavailable due to breakdowns. “We would like to remind the public that load shedding is implemented only as a last resort to protect the national grid. We, therefore, urge all South Africans to continue using electricity sparingly, especially during these uncertain times on the power system.” Schedules For people living in the major metros, load shedding schedules are available here: City of Johannesburg
City of Ekurhuleni 
City of Tshwane 
City of Cape Town (PDF)
Nelson Mandela Bay
eThekwini
Manguang
Buffalo City For access to other load shedding schedules, Eskom has made them available on loadshedding.eskom.co.za. Smartphone users can also download the app EskomSePush to receive push notifications when load shedding is implemented, as well as the times the area you are in will be off. Read: Eskom warns of load shedding at higher stages amid protest action at its power stations