Eskom has announced extended load shedding following breakdowns at a number of its power units. In a statement, the power utility said stage 2 load shedding will now be implemented between 10h00 and 00h00 on Wednesday (22 June). From Thursday until Sunday, stage 2 load shedding will be implemented from 05h00 until 00h00. “Due to the breakdown of four generation units this morning contributing to the capacity constraints, Eskom regrets to announce that Stage 2 load shedding will be implemented from 10h00 until midnight. Starting tomorrow until Sunday night, Stage 2 load shedding will be implemented from 05:00 until midnight. There is a likelihood that the stage of load shedding might need to be increased during the evening peaks. “Eskom will continue to closely monitor the system, adjust and communicate any changes as may be necessary. We appeal to all South Africans to help limit the impact of the shortages by continuing to reduce the usage of electricity and to switch off all non-essential items.” Eskom said the additional cuts are necessary as a generation unit each at the Kendal and Matimba, as well as two units at the Matla Power Station, broke down this morning. This reduced generation capacity by 2,400MW, adding to the ongoing capacity constraints. It added that there has been a delay in returning to service a unit at Kusile Power Station, which is now expected to return to service tomorrow. “We currently have 3,630MW on planned maintenance, while another 15,277MW of capacity is unavailable due to breakdowns. Eskom cautions the public that as the shortage of generation capacity persists, the system will continue to be constrained with an elevated risk of load shedding over the coming weeks. “We would like to remind the public that load shedding is implemented only as a last resort to protect the national grid. We, therefore, urge all South Africans to continue using electricity sparingly especially between 05h00 – 10h00 in the mornings and 16h00 – 22h00 in the evenings.” Schedules For people living in the major metros, load shedding schedules are available here: City of Johannesburg
City of Ekurhuleni 
City of Tshwane 
City of Cape Town (PDF)
Nelson Mandela Bay
eThekwini
Manguang
Buffalo City For access to other load shedding schedules, Eskom has made them available on loadshedding.eskom.co.za. Smartphone users can also download the app EskomSePush to receive push notifications when load shedding is implemented, as well as the times the area you are in will be off. Read: Eskom sends load shedding warning to South Africa – high risk ‘for the next few weeks’