In today’s times, having a stable internet connection in your home or office has become the norm, just like other utilities. Businesses use the internet for almost everything, whether communication, advertising, e-mail, business meetings or monetary transactions. Click here to learn more about Telkom. The home user primarily uses the internet for entertainment purposes to stream video content or movies, and engage in social media or online gaming among many other uses. Since 2020, the internet landscape has evolved as many home users had to adapt to being “work from home/business” users and the need for the internet with a stable connection, e.g. fibre, has become the essential tool to be connected for business, education, creating a smart home and for entertainment purposes. Telkom Internet has since refreshed its uncapped fibre portfolio to offer an endless uncapped experience with no limitations and restrictions to ensure our customers get the best experience whilst on the internet, be it for business, home, private or entertainment. When choosing an Internet Service Provider to meet your home or business needs, there are many factors to consider. However, the five most important factors to highlight are, Price – which includes the value offered in our bundles, the customer and service experience whilst using our services are best of class.
Speed – download and upload speed, latency speed.
Availability and reliability.
Value Added Services.
Self Help Portal. Telkom Internet products were developed to meet the needs of its customers and over time, as customers’ needs evolve, so have our products to adapt to these changes. Our Telkom Core and Endless offerings are competitive in price. We have removed all restrictions on the uncapped products to ensure our customers get the most value and best experience by having uncapped data with no limits whilst using the internet. This also improves the experience of download and upload speeds of our fibre packages. Based on the fibre speed or bundle chosen, we do not restrict upload speeds or download speeds of data as we know that upload speeds can be significant for business customers or “work from home customers” when using video calling applications or streaming on a 4K or 8K smart television set. When signing up for our Telkom endless Fibre Bundles, it also includes a Wi-Fi enabled router that supports speeds of up to 1Gpbs. Telkom’s dual-band routers offer WiFi in both 2,4Ghz and 5Ghz The most significant advantage of 5 GHz 802.11ac over 2.4 GHz is that the 5GHz is not susceptible to interference from other wireless devices you might encounter in a typical home or office. Cordless phones, Bluetooth devices, microwave ovens, baby monitors, or any other device that emits RF signals at 2.4 GHz can wreak havoc with a Wi-Fi network running on that frequency. By contrast, a network operating at 5 GHz sits peacefully above the fray, where interference from other wireless devices is virtually non-existent. Therefore, improving WiFi coverage and speed. With the use of dual-band routers, you can enjoy the less utilised 5GHz frequency with ease. Furthermore, we have also removed all restrictions on our fibre uncapped products for our existing valued customers on the Openserve network to ensure they also get the best experience. When considering a broadband connection, we first look at the download and upload speeds and the data package offered by the internet provider. A higher download speed will enable faster file downloads and better streaming quality without buffering; based on the network connectivity and Telkom Internet bundled with Fibre, streaming video content is like a breeze. Since users are engaging in more video calls than before or sending large data files,  the upload speed is just as important as the download speed. Our Endless Fibre uncapped bundles offer high speeds that are both symmetrical and asymmetrical to cater for your needs. Apart from the speeds already mentioned, latency is an essential factor for users who are into online gaming; our Telkom Internet uncapped offers have low latency to ensure customers get the best gaming experience. Availability and reliability are the most critical factors to be considered in these times; one cannot afford not to be connected to the internet. Telkom’s core network is overprovisioned with no single point of failure, ensuring availability to deliver the expected service experience to the customer. Telkom Internet offers a world calls service with 24×7 monitoring in our state-of-the-art NNOC (national network operation centre). Our customers can login on to the Telkom internet portal: https://customerportal.telkomsa.net/portal/overview/ and view their usage, and the portal shows the number of devices connected to the router. The portal also allows customers to manage their service i.e., change passwords, log a fault, etc. Whether you need to call friends, family members or business partners, these Closer calling plans offer the best value for money. Take control of your voice calls and keep them for when you need them most. Several factors influence the streaming data rate (e.g frame rate) as a result the bandwidth is usually a range and not a single number at a given service (HD,4K, 8K etc) quality level, this is why different applications (e.g Youtube, Netflix and Disney) recommend different speeds for the same service quality level. So, for example, 25 Mbps can service 5 HD Devices, 50 Mbps can service up to 10 and, on a 100Mbps, it goes up to 20 HD devices. Assuming 5-6 Mbps for HD stream  the number of devices should be obtained by dividing the product speed by 5/6 Mbps The table below provides a view of an ideal package that may suit your home needs to keep everyone connected. The above tables are based on theoretical calculations and these speeds are not a guarantee due to many variables that can affect the download speed for e.g, WiFi connectivity and distance, location of content servers, network congestion, concurrent activity, type of end user device and so forth. Click here to learn more about Telkom.