Uber Eats says it has partnered with delivery bike media owner MotionAds, to provide delivery drivers an opportunity to earn additional revenue through top box advertising in South Africa. The branded bikes hit the streets in June 2022 and delivery people on Uber Eats – in more than seven cities – can opt to have their delivery bike’s top box branded through MotionAds. The income from these brand placements is expected to increase their net earnings by approximately 10%, the food delivery app said. This, it said, will create a new source of revenue for delivery people with the backdrop of inflationary pressures that come with the cost of running their businesses. “We are excited to be working with MotionAds as our platform only succeeds when delivery people succeed. Our commitment to delivery people is to continuously find ways of helping them maximize their earning potential by helping them get the most of their time on the road,” said Charles Mhango, head of operations for Sub-Saharan Africa at Uber Eats. MotionAds provides brands with a ‘moveable billboard’ solution, digital reporting on the bike’s movement and in-home flyer drop campaigns. “From an advertising perspective, delivery people offer brands an impactful new advertising channel. They have unique access to the kitchen table and given the time bikes spend on the road, brands benefit from the significant exposure they generate. Our research shows us one bike gets an average of 300,000 ‘eyeballs’ per month,” said Elan Band, co-founder at MotionAds. Uber said its commitment extends beyond improving earning opportunities. The safety of delivery people remains a top priority, with various safety features to help support their businesses. Some of these features include In-App private emergency assistance button, a helmet detection and safety checklist, and 24/7 in-app support. Additionally, delivery people have Partner Injury Protection provided by AIG Insurance which covers them from the time of acceptance of a request for delivery. Read: How to renew your car licence quickly in South Africa