The City of Cape Town has highlighted the success of its workforce development programme, Jobs Connect, launched in April 2021. “Jobs Connect was launched after I tasked the Workforce Development Unit within the Enterprise and Investment Department to come up with a system that was easy to use and that reduced the cost barriers associated with finding employment,” said James Vos, the city’s mayoral committee member for economic growth. “The platform, which is facilitated by Leelyn Management, has two overarching goals: to provide knowledge, training and employment opportunities to job seekers across the City, particularly those who do not have the means to access such opportunities; and to link small businesses and corporates to the appropriate talent,” he said. Vos said that in the past 15 months since the launch of Jobs Connect, there have been 13 activations in communities across Cape Town. Thousands of Capetonians have stood in queues to sign up on the platform. The types of employment opportunities available on Jobs Connect include: Logistics Industry- Drivers/packers/warehousing agents
Fast food Industry  – cashiers /cooks/chefs
Retail Industry – cashiers /packers/sales people
Telecommunications – call centre agents
SMMEs- contract workers/receptionists /drivers Short courses are also available to employment seekers, including: Work readiness training
Problem-solving
Time management
Team building
Customer care
Webs design
Project management Longer courses available include: Business management
Business leadership
Business studies
Entrepreneurship studies
Cloud practitioners How does it work? Job-seekers need to register their details online at http://jobsconnect.leelyn.co.za and complete a literacy and numeracy assessment. The results of the assessment will be added to a digital CV. The entire process is paperless but people can print out their CVs and assessment results. The website is also zero-rated for MTN and Vodacom users. Business owners in need of staff can easily register as an employer by contacting info@leelyn.co.za To date, 60,000 people have been registered and assessed on Jobs Connect, which also helps work-seekers access education and training to enhance their employability. “The fact that Cape Town has long been and remains the metro with the lowest unemployment rate is proof that initiatives such as these are working. But 30% unemployment is still far too high,” said Vos. “With the R713 million Economic Growth budget that has been approved by Council, my team and I will be able to expand on the success of these kinds of programmes. The budget plots a roadmap for bolstering Cape Town’s small businesses and industries and increasing Capetonians’ access to opportunities,” he said. Read: How to renew your car licence quickly in South Africa