Direct Rewards is South Africa’s leading provider of bespoke loyalty and rewards programmes and specializes in the design, management, and implementation of these solutions. Contact Amanda for more info and a free consultation. It provides end-to-end solutions and manages the entire value chain for its clients – from conceptualisation and design down to customer management – leaving businesses to focus on using the product to drive revenue, attract new customers and reinforce retention. Direct Rewards is backed by one of South Africa’s largest financial services institutions and recently appointed Saber Manjoo as its CEO, who has a wealth of experience in the loyalty and rewards industry, having worked on a number of projects across sectors such as retail, financial services, and telecoms. Manjoo joins a company that has been designing custom solutions that target each client’s unique target audience for over eight years. These programmes are popular because they provide instant gratification and value to your audience, and are available across apps, mobisites, and USSD – making it easier than ever before to deliver maximum value for less. Additionally, because Direct Rewards has great relationships with South Africa’s most iconic brands, it gets superior pricing on rewards benefits across industries like retail, travel, fashion, food, and sports. These benefits are weaved into the product mix to ensure maximum value for the customer. Not only does Direct Rewards build bespoke customer solutions; it also builds staff benefit and loyalty programmes that allow you to give back to your employees through value and savings on everyday essentials and luxury items. Manjoo states that companies find it easier and more valuable to present their employees with rewards that guarantee savings on day-to-day expenses rather than providing single lump sum benefits at year-end. Direct Rewards takes the hassle out of loyalty and rewards – it provides tech-driven, turnkey solutions from ideation to execution! It runs programmes for some of South Africa’s largest companies in industries, as well as for a number of mid-sized service providers – this showcases Direct Rewards’ impressive versatility. The company can also assist in the design and implementation of effective client acquisition strategies, helping you to optimise your existing customer management systems and to run results-driven spend-and-get campaigns It is therefore clear – if you need rewards, loyalty, or marketing solutions, choosing Direct Rewards is a no-brainer. Manjoo requests that companies challenge Direct Rewards by presenting a brief of their requirements to the company, after which Direct Rewards will revert with a probono proposal on the best possible options for their consideration. Contact Amanda for more info and a free consultation.