The Department of Employment and Labour will launch several new training projects aimed at creating jobs in the fibre optics, food handling and mixed farming sectors. The projects are being undertaken through a partnership agreement between the Fuze Institute for Humanitarian Praxis and the Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF). The UIF, through its Labour Activation Programmes (LAP), has set aside R551 million for the three projects for 19,921 beneficiaries, 70% of which are former UIF contributors who lost their jobs, to undergo training. The training programmes will primarily focus on the following skills disciplines: 14,771 beneficiaries as chief food handlers;
5,000 beneficiaries in enterprise development (mixed farming);
150 beneficiaries as fibre optic technicians. “Already, the 14,771 beneficiaries have been employed by the Department of Education in KwaZulu-Natal after completing their training,” the department said. “The Department of Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs in KwaZulu-Natal has pledged to support the 5,000 learners’ co-operatives by purchasing their farming produce while Link Africa has committed to employing the 150 beneficiaries as fibre optic technicians upon completion of training.” The training programmes include theory and practicals while learners also receive monthly stipends. Jobs drive President Cyril Ramaphosa has said that government will focus on creating job opportunities in the country over the coming year – especially for the youth. “A revitalised National Youth Service will recruit its first cohort of 50,000 young people during the next year, creating opportunities for young people to contribute to their communities, develop their skills and grow their employability,” he said in his February state of the nation address. “The Department of Higher Education and Training will place 10,000 unemployed TVET graduates in workplaces from April 2022.” The president also called on the private sector to support these measures – and, wherever possible, to drop experience as a hiring requirement – to give as many young people as possible their first job. Read: Big changes coming for municipalities in South Africa: Ramaphosa