MTN Business is delighted to be serving South Africa’s citizens through its role as an RT-15 service provider to the state. The South African government has shown trust in MTN Business, and this has allowed both parties to empower South Africans in many ways over the past few months – including in the digital space. Click here to learn how MTN Business can help your state department. The government’s commitment to improving service delivery in partnership with its RT15 partners will benefit all South Africans, and these partnerships also help state employees to collaborate easily on important tasks and projects. MTN Business is excited to be partnering with government that aims to use technology to improve the lives of its citizens. As an official mobile provider to SA government, MTN Business has been key in driving several government initiatives. For example: MTN Business’s cost-effective and quality solutions have enabled remote learning for thousands of South African students during the lockdown. These students were able to access their coursework online, courtesy of South Africa’s best mobile network, and MTN Business helped tertiary education campuses host their resources online. MTN Business has also aided state employees to collect revenue quickly and effectively, courtesy of the leading technology provider’s extensive range of digital solutions and connectivity products. On revenue collection, the state is enabled with the necessary technology tools to improve the lives of South Africans through provision of essential services. Another area of importance is strong health services in South Africa, and MTN Business has played a key role in assisting this sector. State healthcare departments have been able to give uncapped, policy-approved MTN data to their employees – which has enabled these healthcare workers to save lives. Access to uncapped data is not only available to healthcare workers but is also available to other state departments that sign up with MTN Business. MTN Business is committed to doing even more to help government improve the lives of South Africans. There are big plans to partner with more state entities and departments to help them improve their operations with cutting-edge and robust digital solutions. This is because South Africans deserve the benefits of a modern connected life – and MTN Business is proud to be working with the government to deliver this. Click here to learn how MTN Business can help your state department.