Most of us understand the desire to be authentic in order to be true to ourselves and our values. Click here for more information on the Advanced Masterclass. In strategy, we often advocate that you should understand your core competencies and then seek to apply them in different ways to achieve your goals. And when facing uncertainty, communicate often, openly and honestly. In these ways, authentic leaders can lead effectively in times of great uncertainty and change. Because we are social beings and our brain is a “social organ”, communication is a natural instinct and so is staying safe and seeking security and comfort in our surrounding circumstances. These innate inclinations are amplified in times of considerable uncertainty and change. Indeed, at these times, our instincts are to act swiftly and move away from danger, control what you can, and heed your gut . It has to do with how your brain reacts in times of crisis and uncertainty. We know that the brain switches to reflexive behavior in moments of uncertainty and perceived threat. In such times leaders tend to exibit the following behaviour: Acting hastely.
Not communicating frequently and openly.
Controlling as many factors and withholding crucial information.
Acting tough and fearlessly (the well-known “fight” response).
Being inaccessible. Instead, we should consider the following five approaches to enhance leadership effectiveness in uncertain and changing situations: While uncertain situations signal danger and promote quick decisions and action, these situations require deeper reflection to ensure that the situation is well understood and the information has been fully processed and considered. In many cases, this may require that leaders temporarily remove themselves from the situation to promote more analytical thinking. Strategic thinking requires calmer and more reflective conditions. The tendency is to over-communicate in highly uncertain and changing circumstances. People are often bombarded by numerous updates, communiqués, and policy announcements which can be overwhelming and difficult to digest, reducing efficacy and sound decision-making. It is far better to carefully consider what information  people need, and be specific about what they need to do and why. Security and the desire for certainty are natural psychological drivers we all share to different degrees. Many leaders try to control as many variables as they can, especially when things are highly uncertain. Performance management is often the first target. Micro-management and denying people reasonable levels of autonomy can become an all-consuming task for leaders, often at the expense of more effective planning and strategy. People get the message that they are not trusted, which impacts morale and productivity. It makes more sense to provide reasonable flexibility for people to use their natural ingenuity in coping with uncertainty and change. And it gives leaders more time for dealing with critical issues. Toughness in leaders is usually considered a desirable trait, particularly in times of great uncertainty and change. It is associated with the courage to do what is necessary but unpopular and the ability to face adversity. On the other end, vulnerable leaders are often considered weak, defenceless and assailable. The paradox is that the immediate human reaction to vulnerability is not rejection but compassion. Vulnerability is a sign of humanity and is the key to developing greater mental toughness. It also gives the leader freedom to explore new ideas freely and encourages others to do so. In the process, group cohesion, innovation and performance improve, and the leader grows in confidence and resolve. This interesting idea proposed by Derek Sivers and Seth Godin challenges the notion that leaders have little time for big projects because they are so busy. Instead, Sivers and Godin argue that the real source of ‘more’ time is to steal it from the ‘comfort’ things we do because we are comfortable doing them. In times of uncertainty and change, the comfortable thing to do is to plunge into the things that demand your attention and with which you can cope. The uncomfortable and unnatural thing to do is to steal time from these activities and address what might make a real difference to the organisation. Stealing time like this will generally feel uncomfortable because it is not natural to do when surrounded by so much uncertainty and change. But it is a sign that you are positioning yourself to make a real difference. These five approaches can be termed ‘unnatural’ and cause discomfort in some, but with time they may well become your default behaviours in uncertain and changing conditions. The key learning here is that these behaviours are not the brain’s  instinctive or natural responses. Indeed, our instincts are generally quite the opposite. But as Julia DiGangi so eloquently puts it, if you feel uncomfortable doing these things, you are on the right track. Dr Norman Chorn is a highly experienced business strategist who helps organisations and individuals be resilient and adaptive for an uncertain future. He presents the Advanced Masterclass on Strategic Thinking Skills Utilising Behavioural Science and Neurostrategy at the Gordon Institute of Business Science (GIBS). Click here for more information on this Advanced Masterclass. By: Dr Norman Chorn