Direct To Film (DTF) printing is the best way to print on all kinds of fabric, which is why Advanced Machinery is bringing this technology to its South African customers. Click here to learn more about Advanced Machinery’s fabric printing solutions. DTF printing offers significant benefits over older methods like sublimation, and it is therefore very exciting this is now available to local companies and consumers. The DTF process begins with the impressive AcroRIP software, which allows a single-pass white layer to be placed accurately onto the film. A DTF powder adhesive is then applied alongside this white ink, which prevents any blank spots or print flaking. Once these steps have been completed, the print can be transferred directly onto the fabric – a process that takes place at a temperature range of 160-170 degrees Celsius for 15-20 seconds. Advanced Machinery offers a cost-effective solution that even lets you use your existing printer for this step – offering convenience and saving you money. Alongside its simplicity, the most popular reason for choosing Direct-to-Film printing is that it works with almost any fabric colour you can think of. This makes it arguably the most versatile fabric printing option around, as its closest competitors – Direct to Garment (DTG) and sublimation printing – require white fabric for darker colours to stand out. DTF can also be used on almost any fabric material – even cotton and cotton-blends. In contrast, methods like sublimation and DTG are much more limited in the types of fabrics they can used with. Finally, the quality that can be achieved using DTF is unmatched both in consistency and repeatability – proving that this is the only fabric printing method you should use. South African large format printing and cutting systems specialist Advanced Machinery offers a vast range of fabric printing solutions – including DTF printers. It also offers the appropriate adhesive powders and inks under its AM.co.za banner, and is the ultimate one-stop-shop for all your fabric printing needs. Whether you’re a veteran of fabric printing or are just getting started, Advanced Machinery is ready to help. Click here to learn more about Advanced Machinery’s fabric printing solutions.