The Road Traffic Management Corporation [RTMC], which launched its online system to enable South African to renew their vehicle registration or driver’s licence, is encouraging the public to use its services despite being more expensive than some third-party systems. The RTMC reported that more than 1,300 people have successfully transacted online since its system went live. It comes as the Department of Transport has indicated that there will be no more extensions to the 31 March deadline, which was introduced to compensate for the closure of Driving Licence Testing Centres during the hard lockdown. South Africa’s transport minister, Fikile Mbalula said that motorists who continue to drive with expired licences beyond this date will face fines and possible prosecution. To use the RTMCs new service, motorists are required to: Log into the NaTIS platform
Select ‘View Motor Renewals’
Choose the licence disc/car
Capture card details of the respective bank and pay Once payment has been made, motorists will have a choice to have the car licence disc couriered to their addresses of choice or get it printed at the nearest Driver Licence Testing Centre. What you need to renew Most third-party and traditional renewal procedures require motorists to provide the following: A licence disc,
a copy of your ID
proof of address [no older than 3 months]
permission letter, if applying for someone else If you are registering for companies, all the above are required as well as a registration number certificate. Third-party offerings To help people avoid long queues, companies have turned vehicle licence renewals into a business. Online systems such as Chatback, require no physical interaction with people at all however it comes at a price. Delivery fees vary throughout third-party providers, with the South African Postal Service providing the lowest fee due to its wide network of couriers. All costs mentioned in the below table are added to the actual government-mandated fee for licence disc renewals which are unique to the weight of each car. Here are a few other places where you can get a licence without visiting a branch. Days refer to business days