The National Treasury has detailed its official proposals to tackle South Africa’s record-high petrol prices. In a presentation to parliament on Tuesday (15 March), Treasury said that it had narrowed down its proposals to four options, with a combination of these proposals likely to be the most effective: A potential one-off reduction of between 3 cents – 18 cents/litre as part of a recommended Basic Fuel Price review which could be introduced immediately; A review of the Regulatory Accounting System (RAS) methodology for petrol could result in a significant decrease of R1.03 cents/litre by 2028. However, this will take significantly longer to implement than other measures and investigations need to take place to fully understand the changes that can be implemented. Revising the Road Accident Fund Levy to make up a lower total of the current Basic Fuel Price. Currently, National Treasury regulated levies account for 30% of the total pump price. Treasury said a reduction in the RAF levy should be possible as the Road Accident Fund sees operational changes and improvements over the next three years. Consideration should be given to a fuel price cap, although this will also require significant investigations will be required first.  Treasury’s position on a Basic Fuel Price review conflict somewhat with a preceding presentation by the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy. In its presentation, the department said that it did not think a fuel price review would be as successful as offering transport and food subsidies. It also proposed other interventions such as encouraging people to work from home – and in a worst-case scenario – limiting the fuel that motorists are given at petrol stations. It reasoned that the record-high petrol price was largely an international issue, and was being driven by geopolitical factors outside of South Africa’s control, meaning a fuel price review would largely be ineffective. Read: Government warns of possible petrol restrictions in South Africa