Your business is missing out on local customers. How do we know? Because we’ve got them on our Procompare platform. Click here to join Procompare as a Professional. When people need a builder, plumber, electrician, accountant, new carport, gates, and many other services, they come to Procompare. Now is as good a time as any to become a professional on the Procompare platform as demand for professional services in South Africa continues to grow despite the pandemic and rising living costs. Procompare data shows that the most sought-after professionals in the last three months are carport installers, painters, security companies, architects, catering and events services, garden maintenance, web developers, fencing companies, accountants and garage door installers. Do you provide these or other professional services? If so, Procompare is the best platform for you to find new business. Yellow pages, ads in local newspapers and even small-scale advertising on Facebook or Google take loads of time, skill, and money. “My skills are only limited to what I do for a living,” explains Siyanda Mthembu, an architect from Durban. He tried advertising on social media but failed to win clients on his own. “I have spent a combined amount of R11,367 on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram, which failed to convert any prospects,” he said. When we approached him, he had his doubts – mainly because he was afraid of losing even more money. However, his worries didn’t last long, as customers looking for architecture services were already waiting for him on the Procompare platform. “Ever since I’ve started working with Procompare, I’ve got a lot of clients who have shown appreciation and have compensated me,” says Mthembu. At Procompare, we do tons of digital marketing, so you don’t have to. Every day thousands of South Africans choose Procompare to post the job they need to get done. This is because Procompare has lots of experience with SEO, Google, Bing, and Facebook marketing. Our superior marketing services mean we are also cheaper and more efficient than any other platform – particularly since you pay for verified leads instead of clicks and visitors. Get instant access to new clients. Most of these Procompare leads will cost you from R40 to R150 depending on the service and size of the project – all you need to start is your phone and a valid payment method. Tell us what kind of services you offer and in which areas you operate, and we will do the rest. With Procompare, you can expect new leads directly on your phone in a matter of minutes. Every lead is a potential customer that needs your services, and this lead only gets sent to you and a maximum of five competitors. You are always in control of your workload and spending – simply choose your budget, and you can cancel anytime. Claim customers in your area right now. But customers are not all that you are getting. If you decide to join our community of pros, you also get: A personal account manager who is dedicated to your success.
Your public profile page with ratings and reviews from your customers.
An opportunity to be awarded the yearly Customers’ Choice and Top Pro awards.
A chance for promotion on social channels and in South African media. “I like the fact that they respond to my concerns and have helped me get more clients than I could have managed on my own,” admitted Siyamba Mthembu, who established credibility with potential customers by showing them online reviews. “My advice to you is to believe in the services of Procompare. They have helped me a lot.” Procompare is a part of the Informa Studio group that offers lead generation services to local professionals in 5 different countries, connecting thousands of satisfied providers with their potential clients every day. It aims to provide Pros with enough buying customers to help them grow their business eventually. Click here to join Procompare as a professional.