Uber says that South Africans can now send even larger packages across town with its on-demand delivery solution, Uber Connect Car. “This is due to the success of Connect Moto, which allows users to request that their packages be delivered using motorbike delivery via the Uber app. Uber Connect Moto was launched in 2020 and is now available in six countries across Sub Saharan Africa (SSA), the group said in a statement on Thursday (10 March). The service enables the delivery of special gifts, groceries or clothes to family or friends, while small and medium-sized businesses (SMBs) are also able to request an Uber Connect Car trip via the Uber app to transport small boxes, multiple larger goods or make several deliveries up to 80kg. Motorbike delivery will remain an option for smaller packages under 15kg, with over 200,000 unique users across SSA making use of this delivery option each month. Timothy Kiluba, head of core operations at Uber Sub Saharan Africa, said: “We have been thrilled with the demand of Uber Connect and have seen all types of users, including SMBs such as restaurants, bakeries, parcel delivery companies and online retail shops using the platform. Given this huge demand, it made sense to launch Uber Connect Car to accommodate larger packages.” Uber Connect also comes with two new features that will enhance the delivery experience. In response to a strong customer need Uber has witnessed, concurrent trips are now available, meaning users can send multiple packages to different destinations at the same time, it said. In addition, proof of delivery via PIN will be rolled out. The PIN provides users with peace of mind that their package is being delivered to the right person, allowing for ease of reference where there are multiple deliveries. How does Uber Connect Car work? Open the Uber app, tap ‘Where to’ and enter your drop-off location.
Select Uber Connect Car in the Uber app, agree to the terms and conditions, confirm that your package does not contain prohibited items, and request a delivery.
Meet the driver outside and load your package into their boot.
Share the trip with your recipient so they can track the trip and meet the driver outside to retrieve the package from the driver’s boot. “Safety remains a top priority for all trips requested on both Uber Connect Moto and Uber Connect Car and drivers, senders and recipients are required to follow all relevant hygiene and safety protocols, Uber said. These include the requirement of masks for all drivers, as well as the completion of a safety checklist that reminds drivers to wash their hands and sanitise their relevant delivery bags. Senders and recipients will also need to follow a checklist to ensure social distancing measures are followed. The group said that packages sent using Uber Connect Car must total less than the equivalent of R1,500 in value per trip, be less than or equal to 80 kilograms, and fit comfortably in the boot of a mid-sized sedan. Prohibited items include but are not limited to: medication, recreational drugs, and dangerous or illegal items. “If the recipient is not available to receive the package, the driver may contact you to resolve the issue. Uber does not maintain insurance coverage for package loss, damage, or theft.” Read: Uber adds bookings via WhatsApp