Several new features are currently in the works for messaging service WhatsApp, according to the official WhatsApp official blog and insider website WABetaInfo. This will include a new global voice message player which will begin rolling out to Android devices shortly. The feature has already been in beta testing for several months, WABeta reports. The global voice message player lets users start a voice note and then exit a chat, view and reply to messages in other conversations in the app while continuing to play back the voice note. While playing, a window will be pinned to the top of the app with an option to pause or stop playing the voice message. This feature will be handy for those multi-tasking users without the time to listen to minutes-long voice notes. It does not allow for playing voice notes while the app is minimised. WABetaInfo said that this feature could also be useful when you receive a voice message that has a long duration. In this case, you can continue sending messages to other contacts when listening to the voice message. It is also reportedly testing features including transcription and a seek option to advance experiences with voice messages. Multi-device support WhatsApp is also rolling out its anticipated multi-device feature to all users, enabling them to link up to four devices to use the messaging platform even when their phones lack a data connection. The Facebook-owned service has updated its FAQ page to reflect the changes. While the messaging platform does not require your phone to be online to use the multi-device feature, WhatsApp will disconnect your linked devices if your phone remains inactive for 14 days. This will require the user to relink their devices from the WhatsApp application on their phone. WhatsApp also listed several features that aren’t supported on linked devices. File sharing WhatsApp is currently testing the ability to share media files of up to 2GB in size in select regions. The test, which was first reported by WABeta, is currently in an early stage and it is not immediately clear if it will be expanded to other regions or become a permanent feature. This would be a significant increase on the current file-sharing capabilities of the file-sharing app, which is currently limited to 100MB when sharing photos, videos, voice notes and other media. Read: Apple working on hardware subscription service for iPhones