Jobs portal CareerJunction has published its Employment Insights for February 2022, showing which job skills are most in-demand in South Africa right now. The insights report replaces CareerJunction’s previous job supply and demand index, taking a more detailed look at the job sectors in the country that are currently hiring, and which positions are most sought after. The report is based on comprehensive data gathered from the Saongroup South Africa – where around 5,000 of the country’s top recruiters (both agencies and employers) advertise their positions to millions of registered jobseekers. CareerJunction recorded growing hiring activity in three main sectors over the last three months, specifically in finance, sales and marketing. In each sector, several roles have been advertised more frequently. Marketing +10% Product management
Events and coordination planning Sales +3% Real estate / property agent
Commodities / financial service agent
Account management Finance +1% Internal auditing
External auditing
Payroll and wages
Treasury
Financial analysis
Financial services consulting
Bookkeeping
Other financial advisories CareerJunction said that cost & management accounting, change management and business development are the top three most scarse skills at present. On the other side, CareerJunction also recorded a decline in hiring activity in the medical and health, manufacturing and assembly, and businesses and management sectors. These sectors also had several roles where job ads have been posted less frequently. Business & Management -2% Middle / department management
Business development
Executive management / Director
Senior management
Organisational design
Team leader and supervisor Manufacturing & Assembly -5% Artisan
Process control
Plant / production control
Tool/die making Medical & Health -23% Nursing / professional caregiving
Pharmacist
Medical assistance and support According to CareerJunction, candidates in finance, IT, and business & management are still highly sought-after positions. “Comparing hiring activity across these job categories year-on-year over the last 3 years, the IT sector seems to have recovered from the slowdown in recruitment activity due to the Covid-19 pandemic,” it said. KwaZulu-Natal, in particular, is showing improved employment trends, especially in IT and finance, where hiring activity has grown significantly. The majority of overall job listings are in Gauteng, where 51% of the listed vacancies are registered, CareerJunction said. This is followed by the Western Cape with 21% and KwaZulu Natal with 10% of the listings. Approximately 3% of advertised jobs are for international companies, while 2% specifically offer work-from-home opportunities. Alongside growing and declining hiring trends among employers (the demand side of job placement), CareerJunction’s report also noted a spike in available candidates (the supply side) in the following sectors: Read: Why South Africa can’t create new jobs: government