Here’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today: Coronavirus: In South Africa, three new Covid-19 deaths have been reported, totalling 99,893. The country has 14,230 active cases and a recovery rate of 96.9%. Covid travelling: Leaked documents reveal that the government’s latest regulations for managing the coronavirus pandemic are at odds with the recommendations from scientific advisers. The advisory committee recommended getting rid of the Covid-19 testing and screening of all visitors coming to South Africa. Instead, the government has opted to exempt only vaccinated travellers from requiring a PCR test and maintains that 1-meter social distancing is still required in public spaces. [BusinessDay] E-hailing strikes: Cosatu has declared its support for the protesting e-hailing drivers who demand improved vetting systems, an end to the alleged exploitation and for the sector to be regulated by the government. Thursday marks the third day of strikes from drivers for Uber, Bolt, Didi and other e-hailing services. The Gauteng Department of Transport received the memorandum, in which the drivers demand that it act to mitigate the exploitation of unfair business practices in the e-hailing sector. [EWN] Troubled municipalities: The Auditor-General of South Africa’s latest report details the irregular, unauthorised and wasteful expenditure of R189 billion by municipalities. 28% of municipalities submitted quality financials for audit purposes, and only 11% received clean audits. The Auditor-General described rampant corruption and mismanagement in many cities because of a lack of funds and poor service delivery. Faith in municipal services has dwindled as they fail to meet the basic needs of their constituents, including providing adequate access to water, sanitation, housing and electricity. [Moneyweb] Religious Covid concerns: The International Federation of Christian Churches said that the suggestion that Covid-19 vaccine certificates be provided to allow people to attend church showed disregard to worshippers. It said that the issue is not vaccination but that the mandate would conflict with people’s rights as enshrined in the Constitution. Church groups have indicated that they will not comply with the requirements announced by president Cyril Ramaphosa. [EWN] Markets: Wall Street took a breath on Wednesday, pushing stocks down after highs earlier this week as investors took in the strength of the global economy. World stocks climbed to a five-week high as investors ignored broadening selloff in global bond markets fueled by a combination of soaring inflation in the US and aggressive comments made by US policymakers. The rand is currently trading at R14.76/$, R16.21/€ and R19.47£. [Nasdaq]