Many South African consumers, including car insurance holders, are facing financial challenges as a result of tough economic conditions. Click here for more information about Dialdirect’s motor insurance. Although motoring expenses may be difficult to afford, consumers should review their personal budgets and cut down on other costs before cancelling their comprehensive motor insurance policy. The high costs that come with an accident means driving without motor insurance could potentially result in sudden financial instability. Dialdirect is committed to providing value to consumers regarding insurance and encourage examining four critical aspects of their lives that have a direct bearing on their motor insurance premiums, namely, the insured individual, the vehicle, the policy, and the individual’s children. As an individual there are aspects of your premium amount you cannot control, such as age and gender. These have an effect on how your premiums are determined, but you can also look at factors to help you bring your premiums down to a more affordable level. Review your policy two years after claiming – this is when your insurer will re-evaluate your policy and provide you with possible premium reduction opportunities. Your car’s value has a direct influence on the cost of your premiums, but there are other factors insurers take into account: You are obliged to inform your insurer when making changes concerning your vehicle. Make sure to check the vehicle values on your policy schedule and clarify any questions with your insurance provider. Shop around for vehicle insurance quotes annually, but carefully compare all variables such as excesses and benefits to ensure an accurate assessment. Everyone’s financial situation and claims history is different and it is up to you to structure your car insurance policy after careful consideration. Even if you don’t intend changing insurers, make sure you’re not paying too much on your car insurance premiums. The addition of children affects your car insurance premiums through your family’s various life-stages. Before buying a new car, budget carefully for all associated monthly expenses including bank repayments, insurance premiums and credit shortfall premiums (where required). Should you use a finance agreement to buy a new car, you are contractually obliged to hold comprehensive insurance for the duration of your finance agreement. By making all monthly repayments, you build up a good profile at your bank and insurance company, which helps you cut down on your cost of credit and car insurance premiums in future. Click here for more information about Dialdirect’s motor insurance. Interviews with Christelle Van Den Berg and Sharney Nel from Hippo tps://businesstech.co.za/news/banking/142351/12-tips-to-reduce-your-car-insurance-premiums/
https://mayaonmoney.co.za/2018/10/new-car-insurance-player-could-reduce-your-premiums/