The auction of the high-demand spectrum for mobile telecommunications is a significant milestone for the country’s reform agenda, says president Cyril Ramaphosa. Writing in his weekly letter to the public, Ramaphosa said the new spectrum will be accompanied by agreed social obligations to connect public schools, health facilities and police stations over the next three years. “Like the mineral wealth that lies beneath our soil, radio spectrum is a valuable national resource that needs to be used for the benefit of all South Africans,” he said. Cheaper data Through its data services market inquiry in December 2019, the Competition Commission found that the cost of data in South Africa was considerably higher than in many other countries, the president said. “The spectrum release is expected to reduce the cost of mobile data, expand network reach to rural and outlying areas, and improve network quality. “Every South African who uses a mobile device will feel the benefits of this reform, especially the poor and those who currently don’t access the internet due to high costs or a lack of coverage.” Expanding digital access is critical for economic growth, the president said. He added that cheaper data means that young people will have greater access to digital platforms to seek job opportunities online. Students will be able to access information and educational materials, while entrepreneurs will be able to start businesses and reach new markets, he said. “Equally, the availability of this spectrum will contribute to economic transformation. It will allow many more people, especially those from remote areas and poor communities, to access digital resources and will improve their ability to participate in economic activity.” “The use of this spectrum will also enable the rollout of 5G networks. These 5G networks will accelerate the process towards universal connectivity – where all South Africans are connected – and the deployment of the digital technologies and services that are driving the fourth industrial revolution. “This is a crucial step to bring South Africa back to the cutting edge of digital technology and ensure that our economy remains competitive.” Reforms Ramaphosa said the auction of the spectrum is also an important achievement for the country’s reform programme. “It was delayed for many years due to the policy drift, state incapacity and vested interests that were a feature of the era of state capture. The fact that we have now completed this process reflects the determination of this administration to undertake – and accelerate – the far-reaching reforms that our economy needs to grow and create jobs.” He added that the auction of spectrum is one of the priority reforms included in Operation Vulindlela, which is working with government departments to accelerate the implementation of important reforms to support economic growth. “We are determined that South Africa must not be left behind by the digital economy, just as we are determined that no community and no person should be left behind in experiencing the vast benefits of being digitally connected to the world.” Read: The explosive growth of e-commerce in South Africa