The City of Cape Town’s energy directorate has accepted an offer of technical assistance from the United States Agency for International Development’s (USAID) South African Energy Programme (SAEP). The donation will assist the city with a number of projects relating to renewable energy purchase, generation and energy efficiency interventions, it said in a statement on Monday (7 March). “This is another step in the city’s energy programme to become more sustainable and diversify the energy mix for a cleaner more affordable energy for Cape Town over time,” said the city’s mayoral committee member for energy, Beverley van Reenen. Van Reenen said the city’s energy directorate is currently embarking on a number of projects relating to renewable energy purchase and generation, and other sustainable energy interventions. The assistance from the USAID’s SAEP includes support on: Pre-feasibility study of a renewable energy facility at Paardevlei in Somerset West;
Expert support on the IPP Procurement programme of the City, including review of its draft power purchase agreements;
Tariff design for the City’s independent power producer programme;
Financial modelling input to 10MW Atlantis Solar feasibility study; The technical assistance from the USAID is free of charge and the city and USAID has agreed that the approximate value of the assistance to be provided is R1.8 million, Van Reenen said. “We are truly grateful for the USAID assistance which will go a long way in helping the city with its renewable energy purchase and generation and energy efficiency interventions. “The assistance is free of charge and the USAID and its team of consultants have the necessary expertise. The work is also aligned to City policy and imperatives relating to energy sector reform and climate change mitigation, which remains a top priority given our country’s energy constraints and the changing energy governance landscape. “The city remains committed to its sustainable energy programmes to ensure that our city is future-fit. We thank the USAID for their assistance and expertise.” Read: Norway and the UK are investing R600 million to help take South Africa off the grid