South African chemicals group Sasol has opened applications for its corporate bursary programme for the 2023 academic year. Sasol is targeting high-performing mathematics and science learners currently in Grade 12, and is inviting them to apply for an all-inclusive bursary to study engineering and science degrees at approved South African universities. The bursary programme covers: Tuition fees;
Accommodation;
Meals;
Textbooks; and
Pocket money. Bursars also receive allowances for study tools including laptops and calculators, the group said. The bursary will also provide psycho-social support, to enable learners to successfully complete their academic studies. Sasol bursars will have the opportunity to do paid vacation work, and be a part of the Sasol Development Programmes when they complete their studies. For the 2023 academic year, Sasol will fund 275 bursars. “Education is one of the key pillars in Sasol’s social investment strategy, with an emphasis on helping to develop a science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) skills base for future and giving talented, ambitious people from all backgrounds opportunities to succeed,” Sasol said. The group is specifically looking for learners who want to study towards a B Eng or BSc Eng in various engineering disciplines, BSc in Chemistry or learners interested in Mining Survey at a university of technology. Undergraduate Studies (B.Eng. / B.Sc.) Chemical Engineering
Civil Engineering
Electronic Engineering
Electrical Engineering
Industrial Engineering
Mechanical Engineering
Metallurgy
Mining Engineering
Chemistry
Geology (Hons. is a requirement for Sasol)
Data Science (Computer Science / Mathematics / Operations Research / Statistics) Undergraduate Studies (B. Eng. Tech.) Mine Surveying Applicants need to obtain the following to be considered for an undergraduate bursary: 70% for Maths
70% for Science
60% for English Candidates who are either completing or have completed a degree and wish to pursue a Master or Doctorate study in science or chemical engineering are also eligible to apply for a postgraduate bursary. Candidates can find more information and apply at Sasol’s bursary web page. Read: These are the companies that South Africans really want to work for