Civil society group Corruption Watch has published its annual report for 2021, highlighting the types of corruption that have continued to affect the country post-pandemic. Over 3,200 whistle-blowers across South Africa reported allegations and experiences of corruption and other forms of misconduct to Corruption Watch over the reporting period, bringing the total number of complaints received since 2012 to 36,224. Corruption Watch stressed that for the last decade South Africa’s government has failed in its efforts to make real inroads against the root causes of corruption. According to the Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) which is a respected leading global indicator of public sector corruption, which scores and ranks 180 countries and territories across the globe, South Africa has a CPI of 44/100. Meaning that South Africa has high corruption within its public sector, despite being above the average sub-Saharan African country that has an average score of 33. For the year in review, the group reported high levels of maladministration at 18% of all reports, procurement corruption (16%) and abuse of authority (16%). These acts of corruption include issues such as fraudulent activities in state institutions, compliance issues, procurement irregularities and kickbacks. Similar to last year, the majority of complaints were from Gauteng followed by the Western Cape and KwaZulu-Natal: Gauteng – 45%
Western Cape – 10%
Kwa-Zulu Natal – 10%
Eastern Cape – 6%
Limpopo – 6%
Unknown – 6%
Free State – 5%
North West – 5%
Mpumalanga – 5%
Northern Cape – 2% The group reported that the bulk of corruption issues or other forms of misconduct stemmed from the public sector, including the national government (28%), the provincial government (8%) and the local government. Corruption Watch said that 24% of all corruption reports in 2021 related to local government. The group said that this is due to a leadership crisis where politicians and administrators are serving their personal, factional and private interests, rather than the interests of the people or the constitution. The table below details which sectors counted for the most corruption as well as what type of corruption was most prevalent: