The government has published new guidelines for the return of live sports and events in South Africa. The guidelines come after the government lifted its national state of disaster and revised rules around gatherings. Indoor and outdoor gatherings may be occupied up to 50% of the venue capacity, provided valid vaccine certificates are produced. For gatherings where no valid vaccine certificates are required, artificial limits of 1,000 and 2,000 people will apply for indoor and outdoor gatherings, respectively. “As fans to stadiums, a series of precautionary measures and regulations have to be followed to ensure that all spectators are safe. All eligible and unvaccinated and partially vaccinated citizens should be fully vaccinated to help prevent the resurgence of the pandemic. “There are various guidelines for spectators who are vaccinated and those who are not vaccinated.” Vaccinated spectators Buy your ticket and bring your vaccination certificate and proof of ID to the stadium if you are already vaccinated;
If you are not yet vaccinated, buy your ticket and vaccination teams will be available at the stadium to assist you;
If you have been vaccinated and can not access your vaccination certificate, you can download it here. Social mobilisation teams will be on-site to help you with how to download it on your phone and the vaccination code received after vaccination. Unvaccinated spectators Spectators are encouraged to come to the stadium early if vaccination is needed – at least three hours before kick-off;
Potential vaccinees should be aware of the 15 minute observation period post-vaccination;
Unvaccinated spectators may only be allowed to enter the stadium on the condition they present a negative PCR test not older than 72 hours. “The devastating impact of the Covid-19 pandemic extends to all sporting codes, affecting sportsmen and women, artists the creative sector and those involved in the secondary aspects of the industry like events coordinators, promoters and sponsors. “The lifting of the national state of disaster will bring reprieve to these said industries and revive the forging of social cohesion through recreational activities.” Read: 104 countries you can travel to visa-free on a South African passport – and where there are still travel restrictions