Here’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today: State of disaster: Health minister Joe Phaahla has defended the government’s plan to manage the coronavirus pandemic with amendments to existing health regulations, saying the government isn’t looking to control people’s lives. Critics have said that managing the pandemic under health regulations will give the minister too much power to impose restrictions that limit civil liberties. President Cyril Ramaphosa announced on Monday that the cabinet had agreed to lift the national state of disaster on 5 April. [BusinessLive] Russia-Ukraine: The Department of International Relations and Cooperation says that it is deeply concerned about reports of civilian casualties and alleged atrocities in the Kyiv suburb of Bucha, which have sparked outrage around the world. However, the government still refuses to name Russia as the alleged perpetrator, or label the country as an aggressor. The South African government is maintaining a ‘neutral’ stance on the Russian invasion of Ukraine, calling for peace talks. [Daily Maverick] New judges: The Judicial Service Commission, under Chief Justice Raymond Zondo, has interviewed five candidates for two vacancies at the Constitutional Court. Four of the five judges’ interviews went smoothly. However, Acting Justice David Unterhalter faced questioning about why he had not recused himself from a case where he served in the SCA appeal process and the dismissal of the appeal filed to the Constitutional Court.  Unterhalter said that it was a ‘regrettable error’ and took full responsibility for his failure to notice this. [News24] Vaccine drive: The South African Medical Association has implored the government to increase the country’s vaccination drive after the lifting of the national state of disaster. The country’s vaccination rate has plateaued, and SAMA said that it would be good for the economy if more people got vaccinated. The group said it will also ensure that people who have been left out of participating in the economy do not have to fend for themselves. [EWN] Markets: South Africa’s rand gained earlier this week, having initially struggled for momentum against a stronger dollar, as the price of gold, of which South Africa is an exporter, rose on the prospect of further sanctions on Russia. While Russia-Ukraine peace talks drag on, reports on Russian atrocities led Germany to say the West would agree to impose more sanctions in the coming days. The rand is currently trading at R14.69/$, R16.01/€ and R19.20/£. [Nasdaq]