Power utility Eskom says it is still on track to suspend load shedding at 05h00 on Friday morning (15 April), but warns of the possibility of load shedding continuing next week. “The power system remains fragile and while that holds, Eskom will continue with the current instance of load shedding as previously communicated, which will be suspended at 05h00 on Friday. “The planned suspension of load shedding is due, in part, to the lower demand expected over the weekend. However, there remains a possibility that load shedding will need to be implemented during next week as the demand returns.” Over the past 24 hours, a unit each at the Kusile and Kendal power stations tripped. The Kusile unit has returned to service this morning, together with one of the previously delayed Camden power station units. Eskom said it will undertake opportunity maintenance during the low demand weekend to address some risk on running units. “During the weekend Eskom will release some water into the river system from the Ingula Pumped Storage Scheme in order to relieve the capacity constraints that have been created by the heavy rains. This will be done in a responsible manner in collaboration with the authorities. “We currently have 6,042MW on planned maintenance, while another 14,471MW of capacity is unavailable due to unplanned breakdowns. Eskom further warned that any further deterioration in generation capacity may require further load shedding. “We therefore request the public to continue using electricity sparingly, particularly over the long weekend to assist to replenish the emergency generation reserves in anticipation of the coming week. “Eskom would like to apologise for the implementation of loadshedding and reiterate that loadshedding is implemented only as a last resort to protect the national grid. We will communicate should there be any significant changes to the supply situation.”  Schedules Eskom has warned in a load shedding forecast for 2021/2022, that its system is likely to remain severely constrained for the near future. For people living in the major metros, load shedding schedules are available here: City of Johannesburg
City of Ekurhuleni 
City of Tshwane 
City of Cape Town (PDF)
Nelson Mandela Bay
eThekwini
Manguang
Buffalo City For access to other load shedding schedules, Eskom has made them available on loadshedding.eskom.co.za. Smartphone users can also download the app EskomSePush to receive push notifications when load shedding is implemented, as well as the times the area you are in will be off. Read: South Africa plans new nuclear energy projects: report