Eskom has announced that stage 2 load shedding will be implemented from 17h00 on Tuesday (12 April) afternoon until 05h00 on Wednesday. The power utility warned the public that this constrained supply situation will persist throughout the week, with the possibility that more load shedding is likely to  be implemented should the generation capacity deteriorate further. “Unit 5 of Medupi Power Station returned to service during the night.  Three generating units at the Camden Power Station tripped during the night, contributing to the current shortage of capacity. Eskom teams are working hard to return as many of these units to service as possible. “We currently have  4 804MW on planned maintenance, while another  14 449MW of capacity is unavailable due to unplanned breakdowns. We are managing the emergency generation reserves to limit the stage of load shedding.” Eskom said its overnight load shedding will be used to replenish the dam level at the pump storage power stations in preparation for the remainder of the week. “Eskom would like to apologise for the implementation of load shedding and would like to reiterate that load shedding is implemented only as a last resort in order to protect the national grid. We  will communicate should there be any significant changes to the supply situation.” Schedules Eskom has warned in a load shedding forecast for 2021/2022, that its system is likely to remain severely constrained for the near future. For people living in the major metros, load shedding schedules are available here: City of Johannesburg
City of Ekurhuleni 
City of Tshwane 
City of Cape Town (PDF)
Nelson Mandela Bay
eThekwini
Manguang
Buffalo City For access to other load shedding schedules, Eskom has made them available on loadshedding.eskom.co.za. Smartphone users can also download the app EskomSePush to receive push notifications when load shedding is implemented, as well as the times the area you are in will be off. Read: South Africa’s government asks to appeal air-quality ruling