Following the pandemic, hybrid work is fast becoming the new way to work. Succeeding here requires a trusted advisor that can connect you with the most effective solutions. Click here to find out more about Tarsus Distribution. The modern workplace has undergone significant changes in the past two years, brought about by the effects of the Covid-19 pandemic, coupled with an exponentially increasing digitisation drive. With the rise of the hybrid workplace – where employees split their time between working at the office and working from home – organisations are now recognising what most remote workers knew all along: that work can get done from anywhere. George Moss, Dell Client Business Unit Manager at Tarsus Distribution, points out that as the hybrid experience starts to become more common, so the good vendors are adapting to meet these new hybrid expectations, which will likely become the norm, going forward. “Working from home has enabled employees to avoid many of the challenges faced with office work – like rush-hour traffic – while also being able to spend more quality time with their family.” “However, part of the human condition is also to be around other people, something that will continue to be missed, if people are permanently working remotely. This is why hybrid is becoming a nice middle-ground option,” he says. “Of course, moving to a hybrid workplace is part of a learning experience, as this has not been done at any scale before.” “This means that organisations need to adapt as they go, which is why it is imperative to have the full support provided by their distributor.” He says that it is crucial to ensure that employees have the right devices to enable working in such a hybrid environment. Employees, after all, need to be able to seamlessly transition between a remote office and a corporate office, and it is thus vital to choose the right hardware, software and support. “We recommend Dell PCs, as these come with Absolute Software embedded in the firmware of every device that leaves the factory floor.” “This gives every endpoint a self-healing link to the cloud-based Absolute dashboard. This means you can track, manage, and secure your endpoints and the data on them – even off-network.” “Dell devices also come with a warranty that is particularly suitable for hybrid workers.” “The company offers an on-site repair warranty, meaning they will send a technician out to you to undertake the repairs – you don’t have to send the device in.” “This significantly reduces repair times and ensures employees suffer the minimum possible down time.” According to Moss, a key hybrid device is the Dell Latitude, which ships standard with ProSupport. This support is provided 24/7, and onsite support will occur the next business day. Moreover, ProSupport Plus, which can be upgraded at point of sale, also provides accidental damage cover, which is especially relevant to the hybrid environment, as not only is the machine being carried around more, but the home environment also inevitably opens up increased potential for accidents to occur. “Not only does access to ProSupport mean you can avoid the business costs associated with having an employee stuck without a PC for several weeks, but the ability to obtain on-site service wherever you are means the employer is not limited to a specific geographical zone, and can hire the best people, wherever they actually reside.” He adds that Dell even has machines designed for those who require significant processing power, like graphic designers, which come with the Dell Precision Optimiser built in. This is an automated performance tuning, utilisation monitoring, and system update solution that automatically tunes workstations to run applications at the fastest speeds possible, enhancing productivity. “This is ideal for individuals who require a powerful machine to do their job effectively, as they can now easily optimise their device, even when working from their home office,” he says. “Another critical aspect of hybrid work is the need for these devices to offer an exceptional combination of portability and performance.” “In today’s data-intensive digital world, one simply can’t give up performance simply to reduce the device’s weight, but at the same time, but no one wants to carry heavy devices around either.” Moss again points to how well Dell strikes the balance between weight, performance, and power. He indicates that the Latitude 7000 and 9000 series, and the XPS 13, all offer enormous power in a slim device that is aesthetically pleasing – ensuring that one doesn’t have to give up power to be able to carry the device more easily. “While these models are obviously a bit more pricey, you definitely get what you pay for,” he notes. “The last important conversation around devices in today’s world is the sustainability discussion.” “Everyone wants to support sustainable operations, and Dell does so by utilising recycled plastics, including ocean plastics, in both the devices and their packaging.” “As the hybrid work environment continues to expand, so companies that seek to benefit from this will require a trusted advisor to assist them with choosing the most appropriate devices, made from the most sustainable materials, and covered by the most comprehensive warranty and support.” “In such cases, Tarsus Distribution is perfectly positioned to act as the bridge between the leading IT hardware vendors – like Dell – and the end-customer, by providing resellers with the advice, skills and capabilities required to implement the perfect hybrid solution to suit each individual customer,” concludes Moss. Click here to find out more about Tarsus Distribution.