Changing the oil in your car is a simple procedure that car enthusiasts and backyard mechanics will do in no time. But what do they do with the dirty old oil? Click here to find out more about the ROSE Foundation The ROSE Foundation (Recycling Oil Saves the Environment) an organization driving responsible recycling of lubricating oil, has noted in recent research, that backyard mechanics and small informal workshops tend to throw used oil down a drain or onto the ground, instead of recycling it properly. “While industry faces rigorous environmental compliance, in domestic backyards and in small informal workshops, mechanics are often not disposing of their used oil correctly, with thousands of unaccounted for litres literally going down the drain,” comments Bubele Nyiba, CEO of the ROSE Foundation. “Used motor oil is classified as a hazardous substance, as it contains heavy metals, toxic pollutants and carcinogenic substances that can damage the environment and are dangerous for your health. “One litre of used motor lubricant oil can contaminate one million litres of water.” “As such, it can pollute streams and rivers and ultimately our drinking water, if it seeps into the environment.” The ROSE Foundation is urging small informal workshops and DIY car enthusiasts to comply with government waste management legislation, by collecting and storing used oil carefully and to dropping it off at an approved disposal points for safe recycling. The ROSE Foundation offers the following tips about storing used oil safely: Drain used oil into a clean container with a tight-fitting lid, such as a reusable combination drain pan/storage container.
Ensure that you store the used oil in a container with a secure lid so that it cannot spill out.  Empty oil containers and drums make effective makeshift storage vessels for used oil, however, DO NOT use a container that previously held chemicals, such as cleaners, solvents, fuels, paint or bleach.
Always clearly label the container “Used Motor Oil.”
Keep these containers in an area that is clear and clean.  Ideally store them under cover and away from heat or sources of ignition.
Keep oil change pans free of water and ensure your storage containers are tightly sealed and covered to protect them from rainwater. Oil that is contaminated with water is far more difficult to recycle – requiring several laborious and costly processes to separate the water from the oil before it can be recycled.
Ensure that you do not mix used oil with other fluids such as antifreeze, transmission fluid, petrol, diesel etc.  Mixing them may make them non-recyclable as well as very hazardous and flammable. Many people overlook the matter of related waste – such as used oil filters, oily rags, contaminated sawdust, empty oil containers, etc. “Some people will dispose of their empty oil cans and containers along with the domestic refuse. ” “This is illegal – they must also be properly stored for safe disposal or recycling – we can assist mechanics in finding the nearest facility for recycling of related waste,” says Nyiba. Irresponsible disposal is largely due to a lack of knowledge about recycling, rather than negligence. Generators of used oil such as DIY mechanics can drop off used oil at selected Autozone stores, which have designated storage facilities or to ask large motor workshops or service centres if they can drop off their used oil there. “We are urging the larger workshops who have bulk storage facilities, to accept used oil and related waste from private individuals.” “The workshops are paid for the oil collected, so accepting oil from backyard mechanics is at no cost to them and it is the environmentally responsible thing to do,” says Nyiba. For larger generators of used oil, there are ROSE accredited collectors that collect used oil from your premises. For more information and to find out about an accredited collector or drop-off point, contact the ROSE Foundation on (021) 448 7492 or visit www.rosefoundation.org.za.