Employment and Labour minister Thulas Nxesi recently published three important legal developments affecting South African employers and employees: The Draft National Labour Migration Policy and Employment Services Amendment Bill;
The Code of Practice for Managing Exposure to Sars-CoV-2 in the Workplace 2022;
The Code of Good Practice on the Prevention and Elimination of Harassment in the Workplace. Below Tracy van der Colff (senior associate) and Kirsty Gibson (associate) at legal firm Baker McKenzie outlined some of the key changes and issues to be aware of. The draft National Labour Migration Policy and Employment Services Amendment Bill (Draft Bill) The main thrust of the proposed changes includes the minister’s right to set maximum quotas for the employment of foreign nationals as employees or workers in any sector. The minister may set a quota to apply by sector, occupation, region or nationally. An employer will only be entitled to exceed this maximum quota if they have applied for and been granted an exemption, or if the foreign national fills a position for which critical skills are required. The Draft Bill entitles the Minister to make regulations regulating the employment of foreign nationals, including: Measures employers must take to confirm that there are no suitable persons for the role within South Africa;
Requirements for employers to use a public employment service or private employment agency to assist employees to recruit suitable candidates;
Requirements for the preparation of a skills transfer plan;
The criteria and procedure to apply for an exemption from the minister;
The records employers must keep in respect of foreign nationals. Introduction of digital labour platforms and workers The legislature proposes a new section to make provision for work or service provided to digital labour platforms. A digital labour platform is defined as “an electronic entity that enables the provision of work or services to any other person in the republic”. A platform that meets this definition is considered an employer of the person who performs the services or work, for the purpose of the Draft Bill. The person performing the services is classified as a worker, which is defined as “any person who works for another and who receives, or is entitled to receive, any payment for that work, whether in money or in-kind”. A digital labour platform will be considered to be the employer of the workers if (1) the digital labour platform determines the payment and/or terms and conditions of the work or services provided; and (2) the digital labour platform remunerates the worker. The definition of worker will apply only in the context set out in the Draft Bill. The result of the inclusive nature of this definition is that the Minister may set the maximum quotas for the engagement of foreign nationals as platform workers. Definition of a private employment agency The requirement for a private employment agency to provide employment services “for gain” has been removed. Therefore, a company that provides employment services to any other company will need to be registered and licensed to operate as a private employment agency, should the Draft Bill be enacted in its current form. The Code of Practice for Managing Exposure to Sars-CoV-2 in the Workplace 2022 The Code of Practice for Managing Exposure to Sars-CoV-2 in the Workplace 2022 (Covid code) will take effect when the national state of disaster in South Africa is lifted. Among other things, the Covid code reiterates an employer’s right to implement a vaccine mandate and clarifies the grounds on which employees can refuse the vaccine. The Covid Code creates a legal framework for managing the pandemic and its impact on the workplace. The rules now make specific provisions for employers to ascertain their employees’ vaccination status. Employers will no longer be required to screen employees daily for Covid-19 symptoms or report such information. Employees will only be obliged to inform employers when they have Covid-19 symptoms. Employers will be entitled to request a negative Covid-19 test to allow the employee to return to the office. According to the new rules, employees would no longer have to limit their refusal to vaccinate to constitutional or medical grounds. Where employees base their refusal on a contraindication to the vaccine, the employee must produce a medical certificate confirming this. The employer may then request that the employee be medically assessed to confirm their medical status, which the employer must pay for. Employers must reasonably accommodate employees who refuse vaccination. In recent cases at the CCMA, the employment tribunal has upheld numerous employers’ decisions to dismiss or suspend employees who refused to get vaccinated or take regular tests. Taking into consideration the Covid Code, the updated regulations and a recent decision by the labour court, employers could implement an admission policy, which would require employees to present either a vaccination certificate or a negative Covid test (at the employees’ expense) in order to enter the office. Employment Equity Act  – Code of Good Practice on the Prevention and Elimination of harassment in the Workplace In March 2022, the minister published the Code of Good Practice on the Prevention and Elimination of Violence and Harassment in the World of Work (Code) in the Government Gazette. This Code, which is now in effect, has been guided by various conventions adopted by the International Labour Organisation, including the convention and recommendation on eliminating and preventing Violence and Harassment in the World of Work (Convention 190, 21 June 2019). The Code replaces the Code of Good Practice on the Handling of Sexual Harassment Cases in the Workplace, as amended (Code of Good Practice). In addition, the new Code expands substantially on the different types of violence that an employee may experience in the workplace and what steps employers are required to take to deal with these forms of violence. The Code lists four forms of violence and harassment in the workplace. These are: Sexual violence and harassment This includes any conduct that the person knows (or should know) is not welcome, offends the complainant or makes the complainant feel uncomfortable, and interferes with work. T The Code lists various forms of conduct which would amount to sexual violence and harassment, including unwanted sexual attention and quid pro quo sexual harassment. The Code also compels employers to consider further factors in a matter involving sexual violence and harassment. These factors include whether the conduct was unwelcome; the nature and extent of the conduct; and the impact of the conduct. Racial, Ethnic, or Social origin violence and harassment In terms of the Code, racial violence and harassment are types of conduct that demean, humiliate or create a hostile or intimidating work environment for a complainant. This may include conduct that (1) intends to induce submission based on actual or threatened adverse consequences for the complainant and (2) relates to a person’s membership of a group. Abusive language and racist jokes, racially offensive material, racist name-calling, negative stereotyping, offensive behaviour creating hostility, exclusion from workplace interaction and activities, and marginalisation and threatening behaviour fall under this form of violence and harassment. Workplace bullying Workplace bullying is unwanted persistent conduct (or a single incident), which is serious and demeans, humiliates, or creates a hostile or intimidating work environment. This conduct includes a wide range of insulting, demeaning or intimidating behaviours that lower the self-esteem or self-confidence of an employee. Some examples of workplace bullying include harassing; offending, professionally or socially excluding someone, or negatively affecting their work tasks. Read: Big hiring drive expected in South Africa in the coming months