President Cyril Ramaphosa has lifted South Africa’s national state of disaster more than two years after it was first declared in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. In an address on Monday evening (4 April), Ramaphosa said the introduction of the state of disaster and associated lockdown restrictions were necessary to manage the Covid-19 pandemic effectively. It also permitted the establishment of the Covid-19 TERs scheme, the R350 social relief of distress grant, the extension of driving licences and other necessary changes. However, he noted that the state of disaster and its powers were always ‘temporary and limited’, with the country now entering a new phase in the pandemic. While the coronavirus continues to circulate, it is not causing the same number of hospitalisation or deaths. “Going forward, the pandemic will be managed in terms of the National Health Act. The draft Health Regulations have been published for public comment. Once the period for public comment closes on the 16th of April 2022 and the comments have been considered, the new regulations will be finalised and promulgated. “Since the requirements for the National State of Disaster to be declared in terms of the Disaster Management Act are no longer met, Cabinet has decided to terminate the National State of Disaster with effect from midnight tonight.” Ramaphosa said certain provisional regulations will remain in place for a further 30 days to ensure a smooth handover to the new regulations under the National Health Act. The transitional measure which will automatically lapse after 30 days include: Wearing face masks in an indoor public space. The existing restrictions on gatherings will continue. Both indoor and outdoor venues can accept 50% of capacity subject to vaccination or a Covid test. Gatherings of 1,000 people indoors and 2,000 people outdoors are permitted for the unvaccinated. Travellers entering South Africa will need to show proof of vaccination or proof of a negative test. The R350 SRD grant will remain in place, with the Department of Social Development finalising separate regulations allowing it to continue. The directions extending the grace period for driving licences remain in place. All other regulations will fall away from midnight and the coronavirus alert levels will no longer apply, the president said. The no-fault vaccination compensation scheme will also continue operating. Read: Grant hikes for South Africa this week – and government plans to extend coverage