The City of Cape Town has launched a new load shedding app where users can get real-time information on load shedding in their area, log electricity service requests, and information for city customers on where they can buy prepaid electricity. The move comes as the city plans to move away from load shedding on a permanent basis, says city mayor Geordin Hill-Lewis. “As we work to end blackouts over time in Cape Town, load shedding schedules for city customers are likely to become more complex, with different stages at different times of the day. “Our app will allow residents to access the most accurate information about load shedding, allowing them to plan their lives We want Capetonians to experience the minimum amount of inconvenience from Eskom’s generation failures while we work to make load-shedding a thing of the past.” Hill-Lewis added that the app will keep customers updated with the city’s load shedding schedule by adding their area or suburb via a map, their current location, or by searching the search box, he said. Customers view their area’s load-shedding status and timetables, use the app to log service requests with the city or find vendors selling prepaid electricity. It allows customers or users to see which area is currently being load-shed, and which area is next. “There is no registration or personal details required, but users have the option to receive alerts about load shedding while they are using the app. Importantly, the city app is also dependent on Eskom information and the city will do its utmost to ensure accuracy and timeous updates.” The app can be downloaded on the Apple App Store and Google Play Store. The end of load shedding in Cape Town “One could argue few good things come from load-shedding, but this is an example of innovation being born from crisis. This work is part of a myriad projects under way to change the way Cape Town experiences load-shedding. “This includes constant investment and maintenance in infrastructure to ensure the city is able to protect its customers from at least a stage of load-shedding where it can; while at the same time rolling out Mayor Geordin Hill-Lewis’s energy priority of ending load-shedding over time,” said the city’s mayoral committee member for Energy Beverley van Reenen. Hill-Lewis has previously pledged that Cape Town will be the first load shedding free city in South Africa. “South Africa’s energy crisis is an economic emergency. We cannot keep on just paying lip service to the need for energy security in South Africa. There is only one topic in the energy debate: how to end this crisis as soon as possible,” he said. Read: Eskom announces load shedding on Sunday – here is the schedule