Eskom has announced that load shedding will be extended until Friday morning (15 April). In a statement on Tuesday evening, the power utility said the extended power outages were necessary due to reduced capacity adn extended delays in brining ower generating units back online. “Eskom regrets to inform the public that the implementation of Stage 2 load shedding will be extended to Wednesday night from 17h00 until 05h00 and at the same time on Thursday night. Load shedding will then be suspended at 05h00 on Friday.” “The extension of load shedding is caused by the shortage of generation capacity and continued delays in returning to service four generating units at Camden Power Station and two generating units at Tutuka Power Station. Eskom teams are working hard to return as many of these units to service as possible. “A single unit that had tripped at Lethabo Power Station this morning has returned to service this evening. This unit, however, will take some time to reach full production.” Eskom warned that any further deterioration in generation capacity may require further load shedding. The power utility said it currently has 4,804MW on planned maintenance, while another 15,300MW of capacity is unavailable due to unplanned breakdowns. “We are managing the emergency generation reserves to limit the stage of load shedding. The overnight load shedding will be used to replenish the dam levels at the pump storage power stations. “Eskom would like to apologise for the implementation of load shedding and would like to reiterate that load shedding is implemented only as a last resort in order to protect the national grid. We will communicate should there be any significant changes to the supply situation.”  Schedules Eskom has warned in a load shedding forecast for 2021/2022, that its system is likely to remain severely constrained for the near future. For people living in the major metros, load shedding schedules are available here: City of Johannesburg
City of Ekurhuleni 
City of Tshwane 
City of Cape Town (PDF)
Nelson Mandela Bay
eThekwini
Manguang
Buffalo City For access to other load shedding schedules, Eskom has made them available on loadshedding.eskom.co.za. Smartphone users can also download the app EskomSePush to receive push notifications when load shedding is implemented, as well as the times the area you are in will be off. Read: Eskom CEO gives load shedding outlook for South Africa