Eskom has seen a slight recovery in generating capacity in the last 24 hours. The power utility is now hopeful of lifting some load shedding from Thursday (21 April), says chief executive Andre de Ruyter. In a media briefing on Wednesday morning, de Ruyter said Eskom is now sitting with 15,147MW of total unplanned outages – an improvement of around 900MW compared to Tuesday. While these outages are still too high to lift load shedding, de Ruyter said that Eskom is expected to bring several key generating units back online over the coming 24 hours, with a chance of moving to stage 3 load shedding on Thursday. Should the situation continue to improve, Eskom is hopeful that load shedding could be lifted entirely by the start of the weekend – although de Ruyter stressed that it was too early to confirm this due to the uncertainty in the system. Eskom’s updated winter shedding forecast indicates that load shedding is likely to continue in the coming months unless it can manage unplanned outages. In a media briefing on Tuesday (19 April), Eskom laid out three scenarios: In the best case, Eskom said that if it can keep unplanned outages below 12,500MW then there will be zero days of load shedding in the coming months.
A medium-case scenario would see the country face seven days of load shedding,
In an extreme scenario, the country would see 101 days of load shedding. Schedules Eskom announced on Monday that stage 4 load shedding will be implemented due to further breakdowns at Majuba Unit 5 and Tutuka Unit 4. For people living in the major metros, load shedding schedules are available here: City of Johannesburg
City of Ekurhuleni 
City of Tshwane 
City of Cape Town (PDF)
Nelson Mandela Bay
eThekwini
Manguang
Buffalo City For access to other load shedding schedules, Eskom has made them available on loadshedding.eskom.co.za. Smartphone users can also download the app EskomSePush to receive push notifications when load shedding is implemented, as well as the times the area you are in will be off. Read: Solar could generate half of world’s power by 2050, Trina CEO says