FNB is proud to announce that the FNB Top 40 exchange-traded-fund (ETF) has been voted as South Africa’s best exchange traded product (ETP) when considering tracking efficiency over three years, in the annual South African Listed Tracker Awards (SALTA). This means the ETF was the most efficient in tracking the performance of its reference index. Click here to learn more about FNB. Now in its fifth year, SALTA recognises ETF issuers for exceptional products provided to the South African markets. The FNB ETF portfolios are managed by Ashburton Fund Managers and offer five ETFs which have enjoyed steady growth in popularity and investor uptake. “In recent years, FNB garnered a very strong reputation as a leading and trusted investment facilitator, particularly amongst retail investors who appreciate it’s many low-cost investment vehicles and platforms.” “So, it made sense to rename the ETF range from Ashburton to FNB to leverage this brand strength and help drive awareness and adoption of these valuable investment options,” says Bheki Mkhize, Head of FNB Wealth and Investment solutions. He emphasised that, “The low barrier to entry of these FNB ETFs are a compelling reason to consider them as core components of any investment portfolio.” “The investment format of FNB ETFs means that investors can get exposure to a broad range of local or offshore stocks without needing the money to buy many individual shares at their full price.” “This award is a major feat for us as it highlights our commitment to enabling better and simpler access to the stock market.” “Leveraging solutions through our world-class platforms and delivering innovative and relevant investment solutions to our customers has been a key priority for the bank.” “We will continue solving for our customer needs and continue giving them exposure to local and global stocks,” concludes Mkhize. ETFs are available through FNB’s share trading platform or any other trading platform. The FNB ETF offering consists of the FNB Global 1200 Fund of Funds ETF, FNB Top 40 ETF, FNB Midcap ETF, FNB Inflation ETF and the FNB World Government Bond ETF.