Chris Buchanan is the Dell Technologies Client Solutions Director for Southern Africa and Russia. He is dedicated to using technology to empower and improve communities through superior end-user experiences. Buchanan and his team achieve this by leveraging the optimal combinations of the technology available to produce tangible results for medium businesses, enterprises, home users, and high-performance enthusiasts. He has earned a Degree in Business Economics and an Honours Degree in Business Economics from Stellenbosch University, as well as a Marketing Diploma from the Institute of Marketing Management. In this episode of Business Talk, Buchanan discusses the importance of employees having access to comprehensive support should they require assistance with the digital devices they use for work. He highlights that most standard support contracts still don’t cater to remote working, and are instead limited to employees who are working from the organisation’s head office. Buchanan explains why this is a problem, emphasizing that, if anything, remote workers are expected to be more self-sufficient when managing their systems, which means these employees definitely need to have access to support for their devices. He then details what Dell Technologies’ ProSupport warranty entails – including how it leverages Intel innovation – before talking about what ProSupport does better than its competitors. Buchanan also discusses the differences between ProSupport and ProSupport Plus, which also offers built-in Intel innovation. He then expands on Dell Technologies’ recent announcement that it will be helping local businesses retire their IT equipment sustainably. Buchanan concludes with valuable advice for businesses looking to prioritise security during the purchasing process. The full Business Talk interview with Chris Buchanan can be watched below. <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span>