January can be a tough month for South Africans, managing a budget after the December holidays and the shopping spree month of November. Click here to learn more about Avo by Nedbank. Eking out that December paycheque means we’re all on the lookout for ways to help stretch our Rands for the daily essentials and perhaps a last-minute treat or two before our children head back to school. We are all eyeing that bank balance wondering how we’ll make it to payday during this longest month of the year! Avo by Nedbank, one of South Africa’s fast-growing destinations for online consumers offer great value deals and promotions to stretch those Rands a lot more than usual. With free delivery on takeaways and groceries and amazing promotional discounts across the board, you can now make every Rand count and stretch like never before. Well known for incredible savings on home appliances and tech goods, Avo is fast becoming the go-to destination for great value cheaper than in-store takeaways. With the launch of a 60-minute delivery guarantee of Burger King or the ‘It is on us’ campaign; South Africans have been fast to jump on and start ordering their ‘faves’, taking further advantage of the only free delivery takeaway offering from an ever-increasing growing number of restaurants. As if that wasn’t enough, regular promotions ensure that there is incredible value to be found, and the current 25% discount promotion off any takeaway (no catches, no limits), is one sure-fire way to stretch your Rands and keep those smiles on the faces of your families. For those who are less inclined to spoil themselves with fast food, the ever-popular single cart grocery shopping experience is packing a punch in January. Shop from a wide variety of leading shops such as Pick ‘n Pay, Woolworths, Food Lovers Market and Makro on Avo and get a single free delivery, saving yourself the petrol and time, and allowing you to spend more time doing the things you enjoy most. And this January, South Africans can shop their essentials and stand a chance to win a holiday to Zanzibar or an R50,000 grocery shopping spree. It could not be easier or more cost-effective to keep your pantry stocked and your family happy this January with Avo. What’s better than a clearance sale to grab a bargain? The Avo warehouse is full of incredible products that will be offered at rock bottom prices this January. From home appliances and tech gadgets, be sure to catch the incredible clearance sale starting the week of 24th January to get your hands on never to be repeated prices. If you are banked with Nedbank or thinking of switching, Avo is offering you even more benefits and savings this January. Signing up to Avo through the Nedbank MoneyApp, will bank you a whopping 250MB data package for mahala and an extra 5% off all shopping deals if you are main banked. Never before has banking been this rewarding. The simplest way to stretch your budget is to join South Africa’s first and fastest-growing Super App and keep the essentials (with maybe a spoil or two) rolling in. January doesn’t always have to be a worry, download Avo by Nedbank from your favourite app store and stretch your December paycheque further than ever before. Click here to learn more about Avo by Nedbank.