International ICT giant Huawei Enterprise kickstarted its month-long Huawei Connect e-Government Summit South Africa. The summit is themed “Dive into Digital” and intends to look at how the use of Huawei products and solutions alongside Artificial Intelligence, 5G and the Huawei Cloud will fulfil their vision of a reality where every person, home and organization exists in a fully connected and integrated world. Click here to learn more about Huawei Enterprise South Africa Huawei looked at how their products and solutions could support the South African government in their efforts to fully digitize their service delivery. According to the Acting Director-General in the Department of Communications and Digital Technologies, Ms. Nonkqubela Jordan-Dyani, the government plans to put all South Africans in a position where they have access to digital technologies by 2024. This plan is in line with President Cyril Ramaphosa’s statement that we need to harness digital technology to become equal players in the fourth industrial revolution and foster economic recovery. According to Ms. Jordan-Dyani, digitizing government services will cut costs, use scarce resources sparingly, increase public service access and build on digital literacy. It will also ensure efficiency, increase productivity and improve accountability from government departments. Chief Information Officer at the Department of Public Service and Administration, Mr. Mandla Ngcobo seems to agree. Speaking on the possible impact this transformation will have on the everyday South African, he says he believes it will satisfy their constitutional right to improved service delivery. In chapter 10, the Constitution makes provision for the government to find better and more efficient ways of servicing citizens. By having government services online, people no longer have to travel long distances in the early morning only to stand in a long queue all day just to get an ID document, for example. It will also create a digital trail of whatever application the person is doing and in the event of any corruption or mistakes, it will be easy to trace the perpetrator and hold them accountable. Through the digital integration of all government departments, service delivery will become a more streamlined process, removing the bureaucratic hoops people have to jump through to get service delivery. For example, if one is applying for a social grant, they do not have to show proof of address or unemployment because the Department of Social Services can simply access data from the Department of Labour database and verify that the applicant is indeed unemployed. To achieve this, it is imperative to ensure end to end solutions that are secure and build the trust of civilians – and that is where Huawei Enterprise comes in. During his presentation on the Three S’s of the public sector cloud, Vice President of Huawei Cloud, Mr. Michael Langeveld said sovereignty, security and support are vital in ensuring these end to end solutions exist. By sovereignty, he means that the data will be housed in South Africa and shall not be compromised in the unlikely event of a system failure. By support, Mr. Langeveld means that Huawei will provide end to end solutions through every step of the government’s digital transformation journey from the assessment to the cloud migration, optimization and assurance. Finally, by security, he means that Huawei will use collaborative security services like 12 cloud-native services and the more than 200 services in their ecosystem that work together to protect workloads, applications, and data on the cloud – ensuring that enterprises can predict and handle threats proactively. All this will be powered by Huawei’s highspeed 5G which is already powering smart cities worldwide, they are also certified in implementing all their solutions which makes them more trustworthy. Click here to learn more about Huawei Enterprise South Africa By Sphumelele Ndlovu