The National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) has extended its deadline for student financial aid to 21 January 2022. The NSFAS was established to provide financial aid to eligible students from poor and working-class families. It provides fully-subsidised funding for poor and working-class students at public universities. The bursary covers the full cost of study, including tuition, registration, learning materials, meal allowance, accommodation/travel allowance, and personal care allowance. The application process for 2022 opened on 2 November 2021 and to date, more than 600,000 applications have been received from applicants who intend to further their post-school education at any of the 50 TVET colleges and 26 public universities. At least 505,820 are first-time applicants, the fund said. Potential applicants are urged to make use of the opportunity as there will be no further extension on the application deadline, the fund said. To qualify for NSFAS funding you must be: A South African citizen;
SASSA grant recipients (the SASSA Covid-19 grant does not count);
Persons whose combined household income is not more than R350,000 per year;
Persons living with disabilities with a combined household income not more than R600,000 per annum.
A permanent resident – An individual who is in possession of a valid Permanent Residency Permit issued by the Department of Home Affairs. Supporting documents required include: All applicants must provide a copy of their ID document. Smart ID cards: a copy with both sides of the smart ID must be provided;
A temporary ID issued by the Department of Home Affairs
Non-SASSA applicants must provide ID copies of parent/s, legal guardian/guardian or spouse;
Proof of income: applicant and/or parents/legal guardian/spouse (where applicable (non-SASSA) should provide latest payslip not older than three months, UIF letter, appointment letter, retrenchment letter (applicant and/or parent(s), legal guardian/spouse). How can students apply? NSFAS applications are submitted online through the myNSFAS portal (www.nsfas.org.za), where students can submit their applications using their smartphones or computer. To apply you must create a myNSFAS account online, then proceed to the application tab where you will fill in your personal details. Applicants must ensure that they receive a reference number when they have submitted their application, as proof that their applications have been successfully submitted. If you do not have a digital device or access to the internet, you can visit your nearest National Youth Development Agency (NYDA) or Thusong Centre to apply following the same steps. Read: New driving licence card planned for South Africa in 2022