Specialist property brokerage In2Assets has revolutionised the sale of industrial, commercial, agricultural, and high-value residential properties in South Africa. It is revitalising the stale property sales landscape through the use of a unique, technology-driven approach to each property transaction. Click here to speak to an In2Assets consultant. This involves leveraging aggressive marketing techniques and the latest digital tools to optimise the sale process for each of its national and international clients – who comprise over 50,000 active property players. In2Assets uses an auction method as the vehicle to sell its clients’ properties, but the sales process actually begins much earlier. It has offices throughout South Africa, and this national presence means there are always highly-skilled and specialised salespeople nearby who can optimise the entire process on your behalf. This includes the implementation of an aggressive advertising approach that gets significantly more eyes on your property than traditional alternatives. In2Assets also has access to an extensive club of high-profile buyers who have been pre-approved in accordance with past transactions, which provides a large pool of interested parties. In2Assets’ professional valuers will then ensure that your property is valued accurately, and that your property sells for the highest amount possible. This is driven by the fact that In2Assets never discloses a sales price or a reserve price – allowing you to earn significantly more for your property than would otherwise be the case. For example: In2Assets’ last sale of 2021 achieved a sale that amounted to over 50% more than had been mandated by the seller. In2Assets celebrates its tenth year of operation in 2022 and has recorded sales in excess of R5.5 billion over this period. This impressive track record has not been hampered by the pandemic, either. Thanks to its powerful online technologies, In2Assets has processed over R1 billion in sales over the past two years. It has achieved this by building a reputation for excellence and has destroyed the perception that auctions are only for distressed sellers, with over 90% of its work coming from private sellers, listed funds, and corporate companies who want to receive the maximum value on their properties. In2Assets’ continued growth is proof that it is successful in protecting the value of these clients’ properties, with property sales never being significantly below market value. In2Assets has also launched two new sales platforms to offer you even more ways to sell your properties. The Property Dealroom is an exclusive, highly-confidential platform that will expose your properties to an exclusive group of high-profile and pre-qualified buyers. This platform is ideal when you want to sell your property without any details being exposed to the public, as it uses a closed network property listing system that leverages end-to-end encryption to protect all of the details of your transactions. Anyone who enters the Property Dealroom must first sign an NDA, which ensures that you receive a truly exclusive and confidential experience. CAPX2 is South Africa’s first exclusive online portal for commercial properties that connects buyers, sellers, landlords, and tenants. This digital marketplace is ideal for those who want to sell or rent out their commercial, industrial, and agricultural properties, as well as for those who want to get the best possible deals on a property purchase or rental. As part of its offering, CAPX2 provides comprehensive digital marketing solutions, a custom dashboard, and easy verification of buyers or tenants – all at low and flexible fees. Between In2Assets, Property Dealroom, and CAPX2, there is a platform that suits your property brokerage needs – so click here to speak to an In2Assets consultant today.