Breytenbachs Immigration Consultants has pointed to an alternative means of immigrating to the United Kingdom for those either married to or in a relationship with a British passport holder. Those who are struggling to meet the strict financial requirements for a UK Spousal Visa, consideration should be given to the Bailiwick of Guernsey as an alternative option, it said. The Bailiwick of Guernsey (Guernsey) is a British Crown Dependency and the second largest of the Channel Islands. Although not part of the UK and having its own jurisdiction, these Crown Dependencies are closely connected to the UK. The UK Government also governs some of its International Relations aspects. Guernsey is idyllic, showcasing stunning sceneries and a very pleasant climate, Breytenbachs said. Guernsey as an alternative to the UK Spousal Visa If you are married to or in a relationship with a British Passport holder and wish to emigrate to the UK, you could qualify to apply for a Spousal/Unmarried Partner Visa. However, there are very strict financial requirements that you need to meet. If, on the other hand, you prefer to rather emigrate to Guernsey, you will still apply for a Spousal/Unmarried Partner Visa the same way you would for a UK Spousal/Unmarried Partner Visa. However, there is no NHS payable as part of your application. Furthermore, you do not have to meet the same strict financial requirements as for the UK. You will only have to prove that you can adequately maintain and accommodate yourself. Right of abode in the UK A further benefit in emigrating to Guernsey as the spouse of a British Passport holder is that you can still travel freely within the Common Travel Area. The Common Travel Area includes the UK. Interesting to note is that time spent in one of the British Crown Dependencies is not considered time spent outside the UK for the purposes of applying for Indefinite Leave to Remain. Therefore, after completing five years’ residency in Guernsey on a Spousal/Unmarried Partner Visa, you could qualify to apply for Indefinite Leave to Remain, Citizenship and then a British Passport. You will then automatically have the Right of Abode in the UK. Having the Right of Abode in the UK will automatically give you the right to live and work anywhere in the UK. This article was published by Breytenbachs Immigration Consultants, and can be found here Read: What South Africans need to know about offshore investing