Education minister Angie Motshekga will announce the overall results of the 2021 matric exams on Thursday evening (20 January), after which the full results will be made available through various channels. While the department initially announced that the results would not be made public, due to concerns over the Protection of Private Information (POPI) Act, several groups representing media and learners won an urgent interdict ordering the results to be published publicly. The 2021 matric exams were completed on 6 December 2021. In total, 897,786 matrics registered to write the 2021 NSC examinations, of which 82% were full-time candidates. Marking wrapped up on 22 December 2021 and Umalusi approved the release of the results earlier this week, on 18 January 2022. The class of 2021 was the eighth grade 12 cohort to write final examinations under the Curriculum Assessment Policy Statements (CAPS), and it was the first to write exams such as Marine Sciences at grade 12 level. Furthermore, Umalusi noted that the class of 2021 was the first grade 12 cohort to experience the harsh realities of the pandemic for two consecutive years. Consequently, this class needed more academic support compared to its predecessors, it said. How to get your results Learners can access their results (or register to receive them) in the following ways: Learners can obtain their results directly from the schools or learning facilities at which the exams were written. These results may only be available after 12h00 on the day. Learners can access their results directly by logging onto the Department of Basic Education’s website here. Candidates will have to go through a two-step verification process before receiving confirmation of their registration. A 13-digit ID number and Exam Number will be required for registration. The DBE website is zero-rated, which means it can be accessed whether you have data or not. A number of online news websites will publish the results – including News24’s Matric Results page, or the Sowetan’s page. Learners can receive their 2021 matric results by SMSing their exam number to 45856. The system will verify their exam number and provide them with their results. The price per SMS is R1.50 and free SMSes do not apply. Learners can receive their matric results by using the USSD code *120*45856# and entering their exam number to register. The learner’s matric results will then be sent to their phone once they are available. The USSD service will be charged R1.50 per minute. Download the MatricsMate App for free from Google Play and Apple App Stores. The 2021 matric results will be published in most of South Africa’s major daily newspapers on 21 January 2022. To find results, users will have to know their exam number. Read: Court rules South Africa’s matric marks should be published publicly