Pick n Pay has launched its new vehicle licence disc renewal service nationally due to massive customer demand. The service, which was trialled in early January, will allow customers to renew their licence disc in over 500 Pick n Pay stores. The retailer also announced an amended service fee of R250, with plans to roll out the service to all Pick n Pay Liquor and Clothing stores soon too. “Renewing your car licence disc is now as easy as adding it to your grocery shopping list. Our network of stores across South Africa means that anyone is able to use this convenient service,” said John Bradshaw, head of Omnichannel at Pick n Pay. The service was officially piloted in 19 Pick n Pay stores for a week before the retailer opened up the service to all stores as requests from customers increased to use the service across South Africa, he said. “It’s been an exciting week launching this in all stores and reviewing the service based on customer feedback so far. We are also happy to officially launch the new service with a service fee of R250. This fee excludes the courier fee of R99.99 for delivery to the customer’s doorstep.” Pick n Pay said the system will allow customers to skip queues at traffic departments and post offices by setting up a profile and paying in-store at a till point. The group said renewals can be done for all areas in South Africa and will also allow customers to pay any outstanding fines that could be blocking a disc renewal in the same payment. Customers should receive their vehicle licence disc via courier within 10 business days, delivered to an address of their choice. How it works and costs Register with your cellphone number at the till in-store or register on Pick n Pay’s website here.
Set up your profile and your payment on the portal and opt to pay in a Pick n Pay store.
Pay in-store at the till by providing your cellphone number as your payment reference and the group will courier your vehicle licence disc in 10 business days. The costs include the actual vehicle renewal fee, a service fee of R250 and a courier fee of R99.99. “Thanks to our extensive national footprint, customers can now renew their vehicle licence disc almost anywhere in South Africa with complete ease, while also paying their bills, buying electricity or airtime,” said Bradshaw. Read: South Africa has a massive driving licence backlog – here are the rules you should know