HP, with Intel processors, is committed to enhancing the learning outcomes of 100 million people by 2025. Its education solutions offer content, curricula, and collaboration tools to unlock the potential of every student – no matter whether they are learning in a classroom or from home. Click here to learn more about HP education solutions from Tarsus. This strategy not only involves assisting students, however, but also school leaders, teachers, and IT administrators across the education sector. HP is building the campuses of the future using technologies that foster a secure and innovative environment for teaching, learning, research, and collaboration. These technologies support multimodal learning with tailor-made educational experiences, such as with its education-focused laptops that support the following five modes: Tablet mode – For reading, note-taking, and marking up text.
Book mode – For reading and editing text.
Tent mode – For presenting and watching videos.
Clamshell mode (traditional laptop mode) – For creating or editing content and taking notes.
Stand mode – For watching videos and making video calls. This hardware is complemented by HP’s School Pack, which is a suite of educational software and tools that includes HP Classroom Manager, Kortext E-Textbook Library, and Fluid Math. HP’s educational laptops, with Intel processors, can also be accessorised with HP docking stations, adapters, carry cases, mouses, and pens. The versatility of HP’s education-focused laptops is enhanced by their extreme durability, which is rigorously tested in environments that simulate typical classroom conditions. These devices use Corning Gorilla Glass 3 touchscreens to make them incredibly durable, and the displays are designed to support frequent wipe downs using household disinfectants and cleaning wipes. The same tolerance has been incorporated into these laptops’ keyboards, while further protection is offered in the form of keys that guard against spills of up to 350ml and cannot be picked or removed. Additionally, HP’s educational devices based on Intel CPUs have been drop tested from a height of 122cm – which is higher than most desks – to guard against accidents. Tarsus Distribution is a South African distributor of HP products with Intel processors and services, including its educational solutions. Its HP team has over 40 years of collective experience and has been the recipient of HP’s Distributor of the Year award on numerous occasions, which makes it the ideal distributor for resellers to partner with. Click here to learn more about HP education solutions from Tarsus.