From apparel to automobile manufacture, vinyl-cutting has applications across a wide range of industries – and the market teems with vinyl-cutting devices. Click here to learn more about AM.CO.ZA. Advanced Machinery, a subsidiary of South Africa’s AM.CO.ZA brand, is a leading supplier of V-Series vinyl cutters, which are well known for their high functionality, durability, and competitive prices.  “We typically sell about 100 V-Series vinyl cutters each month in South Africa market alone,” Advanced Machinery Spokesman Eric Yin says. “And most of these sales are to repeat customers, which serves to confirm the high quality, sturdy construction, and cost-effectiveness of these industrial-strength vinyl-cutting devices.”  V-Series cutters are mainly available in two sizes: 800mm-wide devices that can handle 600mm vinyl rolls (24 inch), and 1,360mm-wide devices able to handle 1,200mm vinyl rolls (48 inch). While most V-Series cutters have a cutting pressure of 500g, the new V-Series Plus can bring 1,000g of cutting pressure to bear, allowing for the use of thicker vinyl and a greater degree of accuracy. V-Series cutters come with a Windows Printer Driver so they can be controlled through standard drawing applications, such as CorelDRAW, AutoCAD, Adobe Illustrator, etc., without the need for any additional software. They can also be driven by VinylCut software from Ambitious Machinery, another company under the AM.CO.ZA umbrella. “In addition to high performance levels, the V-Series provides top-rated after-sales services and round-the-clock access to spare parts,” Eric says. Once they begin using the device, customers will receive free life-time remote assistance and other value-added services, along with free hands-on training at Advanced Machinery’s facilities in Johannesburg and Cape Town. “We don’t just provide our clients with affordable vinyl-cutting solutions,” Eric explains. “We also help them optimize their potential – both in terms of productivity and profitability.”  Established in 2013, Advanced Machinery (Pty) Ltd. is the core company of South Africa’s AM.CO.ZA brand, a leading supplier of CNC cutting and large-format printing solutions for industrial applications. In addition to V-Series vinyl cutters, AM.CO.ZA also offers more advanced V-Smart, V-Smart+ and V-Auto cutters, as well as cutting-edge label and film cutters.  “We also supply ancillary equipment within the context of our holistic solutions, so that clients know exactly what they’re getting – and exactly how much it will cost,” Eric says. Contact: Company: Advanced Machinery (Pty) Ltd
Contact Name: Lee-ann Pietersen
Address: 2 Makro Place, Sunnyrock 1401, South Africa
Email: services@am.co.za
Phone: +27 60 600 6000 (Also on WhatsApp)
Website: https://am.co.za/