With more workers accessing cloud applications over cellular, broadband, wireless, and MPLS networks, from on-site or remote, the explosion of traffic IT staff must monitor is overwhelming and complex. Click here to learn more about Duxbury Networking. Further securing this traffic for a variety of user types, employees, partners, contractors, and guests makes policy management a nightmare as the matrix of roles, devices, and connection types grow exponentially. Wide area networks were only used to connect employees at headquarters to applications housed at a nearby data centre. To reach those applications, dedicated MPLS circuits were used to ensure high availability and low latency. This was simple, yet terribly expensive. “SD-WAN (Software-Defined Wide Area Network) is designed to help organisations securely connect users to applications regardless of what type of network (MPLS, LTE/5G, broadband internet services) they originate from.” “SD-WAN technology is easy to deploy, centralises network management and control, and ensures quality of service (QoS) and application performance for users,” says Pete Nel, Business Development Executive at Duxbury Networking, local distributors for Extreme Networking technology. SD-WAN is proving to be very popular, for a number of obvious reasons that include: Simplicity. Get a single, centralised view of connections on your network from the extended edge to your core for configuration, management, and reporting.
Better performance. Dynamically route traffic to ensure high availability, low latency and improved user experience for critical applications like voice and video.
Greater security. End-to-end segmentation and real-time access control secures traffic across all connections, distributing security policies all the way to remote endpoints.
Business continuity. Manage your entire networking ecosystem from a single view and enable Network Operations and Security Operations teams to collaborate to simplify end-to-end IT management. “In addition to the technological benefits of SD-WAN, organisations can gain efficiencies in their connection costs.” “While MPLS expenses may not be completely eliminated, the ability for organisations to securely connect their workers to cloud-based resources via the Internet means that reliance on more expensive connection types may reduce while maximising productivity at the same time,” says Nel. “On-premises SD-WAN architecture does not connect to the cloud. It only connects to other sites considered private and internal to the organisation.” “If you don’t use cloud applications, perhaps an on-premises SD-WAN could work for you,” says Nel. “If you’re using Zoom, Dropbox, or other cloud-based applications accessed over the public Internet, then, cloud-based SD-WAN is probably right for you.” “Modern SD-WAN delivers dynamic routing, threat protection, and simple network management, all while lowering total cost of ownership in a cloud-based application from a single pane of glass,” says Nel. Appliance based licensing for SD-WAN requires users to buy a piece of hardware and a licence to operate the tool. Often, this requires a capital expenditure to initiate the project, lead time related to shipping and install, and then on-premises configuration. SD-WAN as a service is usually cloud based and removes lead time to get the system operational. The primary benefit of choosing a service over a hardware appliance is the predictable monthly cost over the large expense made at the beginning. “If you’re thinking you can’t afford a huge expense right now, consider a cloud-based SD-WAN like the one available from Extreme Networks and take advantage of its low monthly price, as an operational expense instead of a capital one,” says Nel. If you can answer ‘yes’ to any of these statements, then it’s time to make a change: (a) Your workers are geographically dispersed; (b) the types of connections you have to manage are diverse; (c) your IT staff is thinly stretched. “The reality is, the network connections you have to secure are going to continue to increase, the number of applications you have to support will continue to grow, and the different devices that access your network will continue to multiply.” “SD-WAN gives you the ability to bring simplicity to the complex environment you’re managing,” says Nel. Extreme Network’s SD-WAN facilitates the ability for organisations to extend the level of connectivity and security on-site employees have traditionally enjoyed to remote workers located on the extended edge. This capability is fundamental to the infinite distribution and at scale tenets of the Infinite Enterprise, the industry’s response to new ways of working accelerated by the global pandemic. For more information contact Duxbury Networking, +27 (0) 11 351 9800, info@duxnet.co.za, www.duxbury.co.za