Here’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today: Coronavirus: In South Africa, a total of 25,430 tests were conducted in the last 24 hours with 4,482 new cases reported, representing a 17.6% positivity rate.  A further 82 Covid-19 related deaths have been reported, bringing total fatalities to 92,453 to date. The total number of vaccines administered is 28.32 million. Land expropriation: President Cyril Ramaphosa says the ruling ANC will push forward on the issue of land expropriation without compensation in 2022. Speaking in an interview at the weekend, the president said the land reform process will promote economic development for the benefit of all. “The ANC will implement its resolution on the expropriation of land without compensation despite the refusal of other parties in Parliament.” [EWN] Mandatory vaccines: The issue of mandatory vaccinations is once again set to take centre stage in South Africa as thousands of university pupils and staff prepare for the 2022 academic year. Several universities have adopted mandatory vaccine policies on campuses and among staff and students to combat the spread of Covid-19. However, some student leaders have opposed the decision, saying the policies will result in the exclusion of members of the university. [News24] Electricity hike: Stakeholders have until Friday (14 January) to submit comments to energy regulator Nersa on Eskom tariffs that could increase by more than 40%. Nersa’s latest implementation plans show two scenarios, with an average increase to standard customers of either 40.38% or 41.18%, depending on whether funds are clawed back over one or two years. [Moneyweb] Highway closure: Traffic authorities have closed part of the N1 highway near Pretoria after a major sinkhole developed over the weekend. The South African National Roads Agency (Sanral) said the sinkhole was a result of recent heavy rains in Gauteng, with engineers and contractors assessing the situation to develop and implement a mitigation plan. [TimesLive] Markets: The South African rand advanced further on Friday, taking the week’s gains to more than 2% against the dollar, as the greenback dipped on a mixed US jobs report. On Thursday, the rand was trading at R15.59/$, R17.67/€ and R21.17/£. [Reuters]