The City of Cape Town has advised residents that it will begin updating electricity meters across the city ahead of the upcoming two-year deadline. In August 2021,  power utility Eskom announced that prepaid meter software would need to be updated nationally as it is set to expire in 2024. The initial phase of the upgrade project began in Gauteng on 1 September, with other provinces set to roll out their respective upgrade programmes in the coming months. “Pre-paid meters must be updated or you won’t be able to recharge your meter with new tokens and won’t have power supply,” the City of Cape Town said. “Updates to the software of prepaid electricity meters will happen in a phased approach across the metro to ensure all meters are updated ahead of the deadline. Only when an area is reached for updating, as per the schedule, will customers get the update codes with their normal purchase. Customers not in an area that has not been reached yet as per the schedule, will not be eligible to update their meter yet.” The City of Cape Town estimates that it currently has 570,000 pre-paid meters, with all meters set to be upgraded in phases by December 2024. “City prepaid meters are being updated in accordance with an area schedule. Only when an area is being updated as per the schedule, will update codes be issued when making a purchase. Update codes will not be issued to areas not earmarked for the updating in a certain month and customers in areas that have not yet been reached for updating will not yet be eligible to update their meters.” The City said that this schedule will be available online shortly and that customers can either change their meters manually or it will be done by a city employee within the next two years. “All Covid-19 health and safety protocols will be followed and teams will carry identification and work order numbers. Customers may phone the City’s Call Centre for verification. “We plan to go area by area and then at a later date revisit any meters that are not complete regardless of the area. This mop-up operation is currently planned for late 2023 and early 2024.” Eskom said that customers should be vigilant and only allow technicians and contractors who carry authentic identification into their homes. Read: Eskom debt is a buy, says Citigroup