The Road Traffic Management Corporation has introduced online payments through the government’s Natis online booking system. This new service is designed to enhance online renewals and bookings to create a seamless booking experience when using online booking services, the RTMC said in a statement on Tuesday (8 February). “These developments form part of measures designed in response to the Covid-19 virus outbreak where the government has imposed strict regulations to curb the spread by encouraging members of the public to avoid crowded areas and maintain social distancing,” it said. “The absence of online payments made it impossible for South Africans to renew their licences without physically going to Driving Licence Testing Centres (DLTCs). The introduction of online payments means that one can avoid long queues and simply renew online, make a payment and opt for home delivery.” The RTMC said that the following services will be made available online: Online vehicle licence renewals Individuals and corporates will be able to register their accounts online. Thereafter they will pay the required amount for a vehicle disk renewal online. This payment will be allocated against their account. Once the payment is concluded, the vehicle licence disc will either be posted or couriered to the owner of the vehicle at an additional fee. Online driver licence card renewals Motorists will soon be able to renew and pay the prescribes fee online prior to presenting themselves at licensing centres for fingerprints, photos and eye tests. Online registration and notice of change of vehicle ownership Participating financial institutions will be able to register vehicles online (as titleholders), this will eliminate the process of registering at a registering authority. The online vehicle registration fee will be levied on all registrations performed by financial institutions, motor dealers, insurance companies and large fleet operators. The online registration function will allow an approved entity the ability to register a vehicle to themselves as a titleholder. This online registration and release of titleholder function will allow identified institutions to record the event in real-time and ensure that the integrity of NaTIS information is enhanced and maintained. The process is also fully automated representing a significant saving in costs for the old and new titleholders. Payment for online crash report In September 2019, the RTMC developed the Online Crash Reporting Application which allows members of the public to report minor crashes online without having to visit a South African Police Services (SAPS) station. This platform also allows members of the public to retrieve their own crash information and the same applies to insurance companies. Read: Good news for car buyers in South Africa