Zeelo is a tech-driven business that offers flexible, turnkey, plug-in, and SaaS transportation programs for South African organisations. These software-driven transportation solutions help your organisation facilitate daily commutes, late-night and weekend shift requirements, as well as first and last-mile shuttles for employees. Click here to learn more about Zeelo. Zeelo is powered by technology, but led by humans, which means you get the best combination of cutting-edge innovation and incredible customer service. Key technologies available from Zeelo as part of a tailored transportation solution include: Routing software that uses address data to compile the best routes.
The Zeelo app and website, which make it easy for riders to book and manage their trips, track their vehicle, and access customer support via live chat or phone.
The Driver app, which is used by drivers to complete their assigned trips efficiently.
An in-house operations management dashboard that is used by Zeelo’s 24/7 live operations and customer support team to compile, manage, and monitor your organisation’s scheduled trips.
Automated digital reporting that provides extensive data on the performance and utilisation of the service. These technologies work together to give your organisation access to a managed, end-to-end transportation solution that is faster, safer, and greener. “Zeelo proudly works with businesses across all industries to provide their employees with a safer, more reliable, and convenient alternative to using public transport or driving their car for their daily commute,” said James Champion, GM of Zeelo South Africa. “Not only does this improve the safety, wellbeing, punctuality, and productivity of employees, but it also assists businesses in reducing pressures on parking and traffic congestion, not to mention reducing their carbon footprint. On average every Zeelo removes 30 vehicles off the road.” Zeelo is transforming the South African transportation industry and your organisation shouldn’t miss out. If you are interested in Zeelo’s tailored transport solution platform, click here to learn more.