The Shoprite Group has opened applications for its bursary programme for the 2022 and 2023 academic years. Shoprite’s bursaries provide financial assistance towards tuition and on-campus accommodation and are also linked to work-back agreements ensuring job opportunities upon graduation. These bursaries offer students in the fields of accounting, food sciences and information technology an opportunity to further their studies and then go on to work for Africa’s largest retailer, the group said. You can find the full list of bursaries on offer here. Applications for IT, Accounting and Food Sciences bursaries are open from 1 February to 30 April 2022. Information Technology The group’s employees are at the forefront of one of the continent’s most technologically advanced retail organisations which pioneered various initiatives in the past year. “This environment of rapid innovation is particularly well suited to IT students who thrive in an environment where complex problem solving is the norm.” Shoprite said successful candidates will meet the following criteria: Degree or postgraduate qualification in Data Science, Computer Science, Mathematics, Statistics, Operational Research, Industrial Engineering & Quantitative Management (or similar quantitative degree);
60%+ aggregate;
Minimum 65% in Mathematics (from 2nd year of study);
Students in their 2nd to 4th academic year/Honours;
South African citizen;
27 years old and younger. Accounting Shoprite said it is the first South African retailer to receive accreditation as a training office with the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants and accounting clerks will join a small, hands-on articles programme. Students can expect to receive individual attention, have a say in their rotation plan and exposure to many different fields, including buying, logistics, or IT. Article clerks have the option to complete up to three electives. Importantly, the group consistently achieves a high Assessment of Professional Competence (APC) pass rate, it said. Shoprite said successful candidates will meet the following criteria: BCom Accounting, BAcc (CA stream);
65%+ aggregate;
Minimum 65% in Accounting, Taxation and Auditing;
Second to fourth academic year/ Honours;
South African citizen;
27 years old and younger. Food sciences Students studying Food Sciences have an opportunity to work with the Shoprite and Checkers supermarket teams on fresh foods, product development and fresh produce. Shoprite said successful candidates will meet the following criteria: Diploma/Degree in Culinary Arts or related qualification in Hospitality Management/ BSc Food Science;
60%+ aggregate;
Second and third academic year;
South African citizen;
27 years old and younger. Read: University price hikes planned for South Africa – as government looks at new model