The Road Traffic Management Corporation (RTMC) online payments system will officially go live in South Africa from this week, says transport minister Fikile Mbalula. As of Thursday (17 February), South Africans will be able to access the following services online, the minister said: Online vehicle licence renewals – Individuals and corporates will be able to register their accounts online. Thereafter they will pay the required amount for a vehicle disk renewal online. This payment will be allocated against their account. Once the payment is concluded, the vehicle licence disc will either be posted or couriered to the owner of the vehicle at an additional fee. Online driver licence card renewals – Motorists will be able to renew and pay the prescribes fee online prior to presenting themselves at licensing centres for fingerprints, photos and eye tests. Online registration and notice of change of vehicle ownership –  Participating financial institutions will be able to register vehicles online (as titleholders), this will eliminate the process of registering at a registering authority. The online vehicle registration fee will be levied on all registrations performed by financial institutions, motor dealers, insurance companies and large fleet operators. Payment for online crash report – This platform also allows members of the public to retrieve their own crash information and the same applies to insurance companies.  Mbalula added that he will host an official presentation at the RTMC’s offices on Thursday to provide an explanation of how the system works. These new services are designed to enhance online renewals and bookings to create a seamless booking experience when using online booking services, the RTMC said. “These developments form part of measures designed in response to the Covid-19 virus outbreak where the government has imposed strict regulations to curb the spread by encouraging members of the public to avoid crowded areas and maintain social distancing,” it said. “The absence of online payments made it impossible for South Africans to renew their licences without physically going to Driving Licence Testing Centres (DLTCs). The introduction of online payments means that one can avoid long queues and simply renew online, make a payment and opt for home delivery.” Read: South Africa is facing another Eskom-level disaster: minister