President Cyril Ramaphosa’s cabinet has approved amendments to the Electricity Regulation Act for public comment. These ‘far-reaching’ amendments will enable a competitive market for electricity generation and the establishment of an independent state-owned transmission company, the president said in his state of the nation address on Thursday evening (10 February). Ramaphosa said several new energy generation projects will also be coming online over the next few years, including: Over 500 MW from the remaining projects in Bid Window 4 of the renewable energy programme, which are at advanced stages of construction; 2,600 MW from Bid Window 5 of the renewable energy programme, for which the preferred bidders were announced last year; Up to 800 MW from those risk mitigation power projects that are ready to proceed; 2,600 MW from Bid Window 6 of the renewable energy programme, which will soon be opened; 3,000 MW of gas power and 500 MW of battery storage, for which requests for proposals will be released later this year; An estimated 4,000 MW from embedded generation projects in the mining sector; Approximately 1,400 MW currently in the process of being secured by various municipalities. “In addition to closing the energy supply shortfall, we are implementing fundamental changes to the structure of the electricity sector,” he said. “Eskom has established a separate transmission subsidiary and is on track to complete its unbundling by December 2022. The utility has continued with its intensive maintenance programme, to reverse many years of neglected maintenance and underperformance of existing plants.” Hydrogen Ramaphosa also announced a push towards a Hydrogen strategy for South Africa, which will address the country’s energy issues and transition to greener fuels. This includes the development of a Hydrogen Society Roadmap for the next ten years as well as a Green Hydrogen Strategy for the Northern Cape, supporting the development of a green hydrogen pipeline worth around R270 billion, he said. “Renewable energy production will make electricity cheaper and more dependable and will allow our industries to remain globally competitive. Investments in electric vehicles and hydrogen will equip South Africa to meet the global clean energy future,” he said. Read: South Africa is getting massive new hybrid solar plants