Used lubricating oil which has been removed from machinery and motor vehicles during their service, contains harmful compounds such as heavy metals and carcinogens. Click here to learn more about The ROSE Foundation’s initiatives As a result, it is classified by the Waste Act as a hazardous substance and the storage and recycling of used oil is strictly controlled. Yet, there are still pools of used oil in industry yards, oil being thrown down drains and onto the ground, and mechanics carelessly handling this toxic substance. One litre of used oil can contaminate one million litres of water. Because of this, used oil, a common by-product of mechanised processes in all industry sectors, is classified as a hazardous waste and is strictly governed by environmental laws and more specifically the requirements of the Waste Act. In 1994, The lubricants manufacturing and reselling industry of South Africa proactively recognized its extended producer responsibility, and established, The ROSE Foundation (Recycling Oil Saves the Environment), to drive responsible collection and removal of used oil for proper recycling. It has subsequently worked closely with government to improve processes and compliance, among the generators of used oil and the collectors and processors who recycle it. ROSE offers the following advice on requirements for used oil generators in terms of the Waste Act: If a business generates more than 20kg of used oil per day, it must register on the South African Waste Information System (SAWIS). Once registered, generators need to submit the figures on used oil generated every 90 days (quarterly) into the SAWIS. The information needs to be based on actual volumes and not estimates. The following information needs to be submitted and retained by the waste generator for five years, to be produced for inspection required: The month and year to which the information applies
The category of waste; HW07 Waste Oils 01 Waste oil
The source from which waste comes
The quantity of waste reported in tons As used oil is a hazardous waste, generators are required to maintain the below information on a Hazardous Waste Manifest for every load of used oil collected. This document will track the used oil from generator to recycling facility and offer a clear snapshot on how it has been managed: A unique consignment identification number in the form of a bar code
The generator’s contact details, including the contact person, physical and postal address, phone and fax number and email address
The physical address of the site where the waste was generated
An emergency contact number
The origin/source of the waste (how it was generated)
A description of the waste (waste classification and waste category)
The physical nature/consistency of the waste (liquid, solid, sludge; pump-able, non-pump-able)
The quantity of waste
Packaging (bulk, small containers, tank)
Transport type (tanker, truck, container)
Special handling instructions
The date of collection/dispatch
The intended receiver (waste manager) For more information visit http://sawic.environment.gov.za/ Used oil finds its way into the groundwater through disposal in storm water drains and directly onto the ground as a means of disposal. To prevent this, generators must: Drain used oil from machinery or vehicles into a clean container with a tight-fitting lid.
DO NOT use a container that previously held chemicals, such as cleaners, solvents, fuels, paint or bleach.
Clearly label the container “Used Motor Oil.”
Oil change pans must be kept free of water and storage containers must be tightly sealed and covered to protect them from rainwater. Oil that is contaminated with water is far more difficult to recycle – requiring several laborious and costly processes to separate the water from the oil before it can be recycled.
Do not mix used oil with other fluids such as antifreeze, transmission fluid, petrol, diesel etc. Mixing them may make them non-recyclable as well as very hazardous and flammable.
Used oil containers must be kept in a place that can be accessed by a ROSE accredited used oil collector and the surrounding area must be kept clear and clean.
Build a bund wall around bulk used oil storage tanks so that in the event of a spill or leak, the used oil will be contained. In the event of an oil spill, contact a used oil collector to assist with the clean-up. Used oil generators are urged to gather and store their used oil for responsible and safe collection by a ROSE accredited oil collector. Every used oil collector must always issue the generator with a safe disposal certificate as required by law under the Waste Act. This safe disposal certificate issued by ROSE accredited collectors also acts as a Dangerous Goods Declaration, and Hazardous Waste Manifest, thereby fulfilling the requirements of reporting in terms of National Waste Information Regulations, the same information can be used on IPWIS/ GWIS or SAWIS for reporting. Exceedingly small volumes of used oil can be dropped off at most vehicle service centres or selected AutoZone Stores, as they have used oil storage facilities on their premises. For more information and to find out about accredited used oil collector contact the ROSE Foundation on (021) 448 7492 or visit www.rosefoundation.org.za.