Limpopo premier Stan Mathabatha says construction on a new smart city in the province has begun. Presenting his state of the province address on Thursday (24 February), Mathabatha said the Nkuna Smart City will be led by the Masingita Group, with the private developers pledging R5.46 billion towards its construction. The Nkuna Smart City smart city will be constructed in the Collins Chabane local municipality in the north-eastern part of the province. Mathabatha said that the project is anticipated to create 585 construction jobs and 325 permanent jobs. The Department of Trade, Industry and Competition had previously approved R50 million grant funding towards the smart city in October 2021, with the new development expected to integrate business, retail, commercial, industrial, hospitality and residential land use. Trade, Industry and Competition deputy minister Nomalungelo Gina said the building of the new city was a direct response to president Cyril’s Ramaphosa call for new development and the push for post-apartheid smart cities. “We are all under great pressure to create jobs and change the direction that the economy is taking. The figures by the StatsSA on employment crisis levels requires that we give support to everyone intending to create opportunities for our people,” she said. “Any multiplier effects project and company that will result in more employment will always be our natural ally as government. This excites me that a black company is amongst those that remain with their heads above the water in the face of the economic slump as effects by Covid-19 challenges,” said Gina. The Nkuna Smart City joins at least three other similar developments which are currently slated for construction across the country. Eastern Cape premier Oscar Mabuyane announced that work is underway to develop a new coastal smart city in his state of the province address on 17 February. In his state of the province address on 18 February, North West premier Bushy Maape announced that work is underway on a new smart city that borders municipalities of Gauteng and the Madibeng local municipality. The Mooikloof Mega-City development is set to be built in the east of Pretoria and was officially launched by president Ramaphosa in October 2020. Read: A look at the 25 square metre micro-apartments for sale in Cape Town