Since half of the brain is devoted to interpreting visual information, meetings that lack visual tools are often unproductive and ineffective. For example, an analysis of 3.7 million Twitter accounts revealed that Tweets with GIFs gained 55% more engagement than those without GIFs. Click here to find out how Logitech Scribe can benefit your business. “By incorporating visual collaboration tools into meeting rooms, businesses can create an engaging and productive environment where employees can think more creatively and collaborate better,” says Loubna Imenchal, Head of Logitech for Enterprise Business AMECA at Logitech Africa. “That’s why capabilities like video conferencing, screen sharing, and whiteboarding have become non-negotiables for the remote and in-office workforce, especially as more employees return to the office.” In-office and remote employees require solutions like webcams, conference cameras, and cloud video platforms to collaborate. However, effective collaboration requires other tools beyond video conferencing. Interactive digital whiteboarding is one of these tools. Unlike traditional whiteboards that require all participants to be in the office, interactive whiteboarding comprises a large digital screen that in-office and remote employees can draw on with special pens to create the effect of a traditional whiteboard but in digital format. These solutions offer several features and functionality, including two-way interaction between in-office and remote colleagues. Nevertheless, some organisations only purchase a limited number of interactive whiteboards due to their high cost and complexity. Because interactive whiteboards address a different need to traditional whiteboards, companies also often reserve them for structured, pre-planned collaborations and for employees familiar with the technology. Therefore, teams that want to spontaneously launch a brainstorming session or visualise ideas in a meeting are unlikely to have access to this technology or may struggle to operate it and incorporate it into the session. When Logitech set out to create a way to bring whiteboards into video meetings, simplicity was a primary objective. Understanding that people love how easy and hassle-free it is to use a physical whiteboard, the video conferencing solutions provider wanted to replicate that experience to enable fast, easy collaboration for in-office and remote employees. The result is Logitech Scribe – a whiteboard camera for the modern workplace. With one simple tap of its wireless share button or a meeting room controller, like Logitech Tap, Scribe instantly broadcasts physical whiteboard content into video meetings with outstanding clarity. Behind the scenes, built-in artificial intelligence enhances the image to adjust the perspective, eliminate glare, brighten illustrations and writing, and remove the person at the board. Scribe works with Microsoft Teams® Rooms, Zoom Rooms™, and other leading video conferencing services to seamlessly incorporate whiteboard content within the meeting. Scribe is a solution for businesses that want to bridge the gap between in-person and remote participants and make brainstorming sessions and team meetings productive by giving everyone a seat at the boardroom table, whether they’re in the office or viewing from a laptop at their remote workstation. Click here to find out how Logitech Scribe can benefit your business.