The sixth-generation Mercedes-Benz C-Class is available in South Africa. Since its introduction in 1982, with the launch of the so-called ‘Baby Benz’ 190, more than 10.5 million C-Class vehicles have been sold in more than 100 markets globally. The new C-Class is manufactured in Mercedes-Benz Cars production plants in Bremen, Beijing, and East London. The carmaker has already invested R13 billion in numerous upgrades at the East London plant in preparation for the production of the new model, providing a major boost to the local automotive industry. Mark Raine, president of Mercedes-Benz Cars and co-chief executive of Mercedes-Benz South Africa said the fact that East London is one of three global manufacturing plants for the new C-Class is an unparalleled success story for the local industry. Bigger, better, sleeker “The new C-Class is a sporty interpretation of modern luxury. It combines dynamic proportions with accentuated design lines and a modern look. I am entirely confident that the new C-Class will excite existing customers and future fans with its wide range of high-tech and superior features derived from the flagship S-Class,” said Raine. “The new C-Class will be launched into the South Africa market initially with the C200 and C220d engine derivatives, both sporting four-cylinder units from the current modular FAME (Family of Modular Engines) Mercedes-Benz engine family,” said Selvin Govender, VP of Marketing and Sales for Mercedes-Benz Cars. The C200 boasts power delivery of 150kw and 300Nm of torque, while the C220d delivers 147kw and 440Nm of Torque. The C220d achieves combined fuel consumption of 4.4l – 5.2l/100km and the C200 achieves combined fuel consumption of 6.3l – 7.2l/100km. The new C-Class is considerably larger than its predecessor, with a length of 4751 mm and a width of 1820 mm. The wheelbase has increased by 25 mm to 2865 mm, with both the front and rear passengers benefiting from the increased exterior dimensions. “The sporty bonnet with power domes accentuates this urge of forward motion. The designers have reduced lines to a minimum, which accentuates the so-called catwalk line or shoulder line even more,” the German carmaker said. The Avantgarde Line, which is a market standard, is equipped with an 18inch wheel, with further options available in 18inch or 19inch configurations. The optional AMG line is equipped with a 19-inch wheel as a standard, with an additional option available in a 19-inch configuration. Hey Mercedes: the increasingly sharp voice assistant The voice assistant “Hey Mercedes” becomes more interactive and capable of learning by activating online services in the Mercedes me App, the group said. Certain actions can be performed even without the activation keyword Hey Mercedes. These include taking a telephone call. It also explains vehicle functions, and, for example, can help when asked how to connect a smartphone by Bluetooth or where the first-aid kit can be found. Hey Mercedes is also able to recognise the vehicle occupants by their voices. Augmented Video is available as optional equipment. A camera registers the surroundings in front of the vehicle. The moving images are shown on the central display. In addition, virtual objects, information, and markers are superimposed on the video image. These include e.g. traffic signs, directional arrows, lane-change recommendations, and house numbers. This can make navigation much easier, especially in urban areas, said Mercedes. Driving assistance: support in hazardous situations Compared to the previous C-Class series, the latest generation of the Driving Assistance Systems has additional and advanced functions, the company said. “These reduce driver workload in day-to-day situations, for more comfortable and safe driving. When danger threatens, the assistance systems can respond to impending collisions as the situation demands.” The engine range has only four-cylinder units from the current modular FAME (Family of Modular Engines) Mercedes-Benz engine family. Accordingly, the engine range plays a major role in the flexibility of the international production network, with needs-based electrification, it said. “The four-cylinder M 254 petrol engine with a second-generation starter-generator with an additional output of up to 15 kW and 200 Nm more torque is also celebrating its première in the C-Class. Thanks to energy recovery and the ability to “glide” with the engine switched off, the petrol engine is highly efficient. In the M 254, Mercedes-Benz has for the first time combined all the innovations of the modular engine family of four and six-cylinder petrol and diesel units in a single-engine.”