Mobile operator MTN says it is on the lookout for 150 digital experts to ensure it keeps pace with growing digital demand. The move ties in with MTN Group’s 2025 ambition to become Africa’s leading digital platform business by 2025. “We intend to lead the delivery of a bold new digital world and are therefore looking to expand our teams to ensure we keep challenging what we do to always do better,” said Tebogo Maenetja chief of human resources at MTN South Africa. “As we recover from the devastation of Covid-19, exciting job openings for young people and those with high-level digital skills and aptitude are opening up within MTN; proof of the power that connectivity holds for South Africans.” MTN said its expansion drive to become a fully-fledged technology services company has seen the business expand and diversify significantly. The new positions it’s looking to fill cover many new critical roles, including: UX and UI designers;
Product owners;
Performance marketers;
Digital content specialists;
E-commerce experts;
Full-stack developers;
Scrum masters;
Business analysts. “We are innovating more and investing to lead with platforms that will all be powered by the nation’s best network,” said Maenetja. “Our experts and expertise will be central to helping us bring these benefits of the modern, digital world to more South African citizens, but we know our success will be measured by the quality of our people and our ability to create and to influence and improve the lives of all.” With South Africa’s unemployment rate at a record 34.9% in the third quarter of 2021, and more than half a million jobs shed, Maenetja said it is crucial that companies help create more jobs and more opportunities; with the drive for digital solutions in the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) an important enabler of jobs growth and an avenue to help close skills gaps. The United Nations Industrial Development Organisation says South Africa is beset by the triple challenge of income inequality, unemployment and poverty, amidst a prematurely deindustrializing economy. Yet it is now facing the realities of a paradigm shift in the way business is done and how people live and work because of the disruptions caused by the Covid-19 pandemic, MTN said. It added that certain 4IR technologies saw a surge in South Africa during the Covid-19 pandemic, citing data from the UN. These include Artificial Intelligence (AI) in medical diagnosis, the Internet of Things (IoT) for consumer goods, and mobile applications for financial transactions, transportation and utility vending. Other important technologies include digital learning platforms used by universities and schools, augmented and virtual reality in teaching and learning, as well as in entertainment, drones for delivering medicine to rural areas, and 3D printing for medical use. “The way people live, play and work has changed forever and MTN is embracing a new world of digital technology and service in areas like fintech, AI, IoT, robotics and many more.” “There is much to do as we continue expanding our solutions, put more focus on innovation, and keep investing in the quality of our network, which has led MTN again being again voted SA’s best network, we look forward to welcoming over 100 high-level candidates to MTN SA in 2022 as they join us on the next exciting chapter in our journey,” said Maenetja Read: MTN launches pre-paid plans for small and informal businesses