The Huawei Connect final industry week started in full swing with the Digital Power Summit South Africa being held at the Huawei Office Park. The summit looked at how Huawei can bring its vision for a fully digital and integrated world where every person, home and organization has access to digital technologies, to life. Click here to find out more about Huawei’s Intelligent Energy. This will be done through Huawei’s innovative use of a highspeed and reliable 5G network, Artificial Intelligence and the support of the Huawei cloud. Of course, to do this, one would need lots of electricity to power it – which would be a big problem in South Africa where we have been experiencing load shedding for the past 14 years. In fact, in August 2021, MoneyWeb reported that we experienced at least 650 hours of load shedding in the first half of the year. This is in addition to the power outages experienced as a result of cable theft and technical faults. That is where Huawei’s cutting-edge solutions come in. Huawei’s range of Photo Voltaic (PV) solutions uses bits to manage watts. This means that we will move from traditional and outdated methods of generating power. These methods have proven to be unreliable and unsustainable.  Furthermore, our infrastructure is clearly unable to manage the demand and with Eskom CEO Andre de Ruyter informing South Africans to expect another five years of load shedding – one can safely assume that Eskom has no plans to build additional power plants to manage the demand. The Huawei FusionSolar Smart PV Solution uses the Smart Sting Inverter and Smart Transformer Station to transform solar energy into electricity. This ensures that your organization is constantly powered and productive. It is no secret that traditional methods of power generation are massive contributors to global carbon emissions. In fact, a report by Bloomberg Green released in March 2021 placed named South Africa as the world’s 12th largest source of greenhouse gasses. Using Huawei’s solutions will greatly decrease our carbon footprint and bring us closer to being carbon neutral. Carbon Neutrality is a state where the amount of carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere is balanced through its removal or elimination. Through solutions like the FusionSolar, the amount of carbon emissions is reduced significantly – eliminating it from the atmosphere. For these green solutions, Huawei has won multiple awards. In September 2021, the World-Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) awarded Huawei the WWF Climate Solver award 2020 for the top of the range FusionSolar Smart PV solution. For their green 5G innovation, Huawei scooped the Global Industry Award for Sustainable Impact at the 2019 ITU Telecom World Awards. In the same year, Huawei walked away with the Intersolar Award at Intersolar 2019 for the SUN2000 15-20KTL series smart inverter. Carbon Neutrality and reliable, uninterrupted electricity may seem unattainable, especially with the current reality in South Africa, but through Huawei’s solutions and products, interruptions caused by power cuts can be a thing of the past, all while taking care of the environment. Click here to find out more about Huawei’s Intelligent Energy. By Sphumelele Ndlovu