Digital transformation is reimagining how SMBs conduct business. It involves integrating digital technologies and solutions into every area of a business. Click here to learn more about ERP solutions from Seidor Africa. For companies ready to take the leap, Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) software can provide the ideal platform for digital transformation, enabling them to integrate all aspects of business operations – leading to greater efficiency, speed, customer satisfaction and profit. A solution like SAP Business One integrates key areas such as financials, operations, sales, inventory, and customer relationship management in one single application. This not only makes it easier to use, but also results in a much faster time to value. One of the biggest benefits for SMBs of working with a longstanding SAP partner is the lessons learnt from the many implementations concluded. This has allowed Seidor Africa to pre-configure systems much faster than less experienced solution providers. Dedicated sales, consulting, support and account management teams each have a narrow focus, creating areas of acute expertise and strong relationships of trust with the customer. Being based on the African continent, we make sure that we can work with customers in many countries. Because of our business structure and highly experienced teams, we are able to quickly localise deployments in line with compliance, legal & fiscal, and language requirements and the tailored and affordable solution offerings, combined with agility & scalability keep clients across the continent happy. A key consideration for SMBs considering an ERP solution is cost transparency. Buried costs for hardware and hosting in complicated quotes can be a big headache for the SMB owners so we have focused on comprehensive and complete offerings that are clear, avoid confusing tech jargon and also refer to the underlying infrastructure needed for a successful ERP system. By way of example, with cloud implementations, cloud providers need to be reliable, and we need to work closely with them. Through trial and error, we have carefully chosen the best and most reliable cloud providers who can offer customers a solid underlying infrastructure for their ERP system. We’ve made our partnerships with infrastructure providers equally as important as the relationship with SAP and our clients. As part of listening to client’s business needs and understanding what is needed for better business, we also offer ready-to-go business intelligence solutions for sales, inventory, procurement, finance, cash flow management and more, which provides immense insights value for the customer. Seidor knows that making digital transformation simple, fast, and affordable is what gets SMBs successful and profitable in the shortest possible time. The answer is a rapid return on investment with a system that is scalable, dependable, and already best of breed. Click here to learn more about ERP solutions from Seidor Africa. By: Andre Adendorff, Director of Presales, Seidor Africa