Given the current economic climate and renewed way of working, more companies and SMEs are choosing to rent their equipment, rather than tie up cash by purchasing them outright. By leasing instead of spending thousands on buying, you can upgrade your own assets as global technologies and your unique business requirements evolve. Discover more advice from RentWorks: Why flexible short-term rentals are the way forward for SA businesses.
Expand your business with our tailored solutions for suppliers.
Get REAMs of benefits with RentWorks rental solutions. These are the key reasons why you should consider renting your equipment rather than purchasing it. Why use shareholders’ cash or make use of traditional finance solutions to purchase assets that require regular replacement and disposal, when rentals offer you a superior solution? Rental solutions empower companies to fix their equipment costs with regular, predictable payments. RentWorks’ unique rental model provides you with the benefit of not paying the full capital cost of the asset. It also empowers you to structure tailored solutions, giving you rates below prime. Look for solutions with zero deposits, flexible options, and scalable solutions – this will provide you with the agility needed to stay ahead of your competitors. If your organisation pays cash for expensive IT equipment, it makes no sense to buy these assets only to have them depreciate almost immediately. Rental solutions are guaranteed to keep your business equipped with the latest technology, without the hassle of investing a fortune in depreciating hardware. For projects or short-term utilisation, RentWorks short-term rental options are completely flexible and include the possibility to rent the latest technology from one month, up to a year. The simplicity of this rental solution ensures companies can benefit from the full, uninterrupted use of the equipment and then simply return, replace, or upgrade it when the agreement comes to an end. Combining the latest technology with a decade of experience, REAM (RentWorks Enterprise Asset Management) delivers a sustainable and cost-effective asset management service. RentWorks provides this platform with a fully customisable dashboard that is accessible for free to all RentWorks customers – allowing you to access live, real-time data at the touch of a button. This service provides a full asset register of all assets on rental. RentWorks are also able to provide asset location via our asset tracking capability at a cost-effective additional charge. Your ability to monitor your asset environment dynamically means you get more real-time information for better decision-making. Your business can also ensure that assets are used for their intended purpose, used in the location intended, and by the person or department that needs to use the asset by adding a tracking capability. This, in turn, translates into the best possible return on investment. Click here to discover RentWorks’ unique approach to asset acquisition.