Power utility Eskom says it is on track to keep load shedding in place until 05h00 on Monday, despite the return of units to the grid. Addressing a media briefing on Thursday (3 February), Eskom chief executive Andre de Ruyter said the country is currently sitting with 12,902MW of total unplanned outages – a slight improvement from the same time yesterday. He added that the power utility’s dam levels had also recovered somewhat. The key figures show: Planned capacity outages of 5,155MW
Partial unplanned load losses of 5,183MW
Full load losses of 7,719MW
Total unplanned outages of 12,902MW While this slight recovery is promising, it does not necessarily mean that load shedding will be lifted earlier this weekend, said chief operating officer Jan Oberholzer. He noted that when Eskom announces load shedding, its energy experts ‘really apply their minds’ to how long an outage is required to restore systems and fuel reserves. However, he said that Eskom was very cognizant of the effect of load shedding on the economy and that it will do what it can to ease this pressure. Oberholzer pointed to examples in the past where load shedding was lifted during the day and then reintroduced between 21h00 – 05h00 so as to ease pressure on businesses. “Current indications are that we continue until 05h00 on Monday as communicated, however, we will assess the situation during the day and make a decision then,” he said. Schedule Eskom has warned in a summer load shedding forecast for 2021/2022, that its system is likely to remain severely constrained for the near future. For people living in the major metros, load shedding schedules are available here: City of Johannesburg
City of Ekurhuleni 
City of Tshwane 
City of Cape Town (PDF)
Nelson Mandela Bay
eThekwini
Manguang
Buffalo City For access to other load shedding schedules, Eskom has made them available on loadshedding.eskom.co.za. Smartphone users can also download the app EskomSePush to receive push notifications when load shedding is implemented, as well as the times the area you are in will be off. Read: Cape Town begins plans to move off Eskom’s grid and away from load shedding