“If you are among the nearly 70% of enterprise organisations that have yet to experience the benefits of SD-WAN technology, don’t worry we understand,” says Pete Nel, Business Development Executive at Duxbury Networking, local distributors for Extreme Networking technology. Click here to register for the webinar. The landscape is diverse, and the technology is ever changing. The software-defined wide area network (SD-WAN) is taking off in enterprises of all sizes, and for good reason. Simplifying administration with a centralised policy driven approach, the SD-WAN is transport independent, whether MPLS, Internet, WiFi, 3G, 4G or 5G and prioritises traffic according to policy. “It increases business agility and speeds provisioning, while driving down the total cost of the WAN.” “The first generation of SD-WAN was really about reducing costs, and replacing MPLS with broadband and dedicated internet access.” “Now we are in the phase where SD-WAN is not about reducing cost, it’s about business continuity,” says Nel. Extreme Networks is hosting a webinar on 15 and 17 February where delegates will learn the top trends in SD-WAN technology, what Cloud-Native SD-WAN is and why it’s important, as well as explore the key tenets of the right SD-WAN solution. “In this webinar you will learn the top trends in SD-WAN technology, what Cloud-Native SD-WAN is and why it’s important, as well as explore the key tenets of the right SD-WAN solution,” says Nel. The webinar will cover: Introduction to SD-WAN technology.
How top industry experts see the SD-WAN market evolving in 2022
Why a cloud-native SD-WAN platform can make all the difference
Top 5 questions you should be prepared to answer when picking an SD-WAN provider. Dan Dulac is Extreme’s Vice President of SaaS Solutions Strategy. He is responsible for global go-to-market enablement of Extreme’s SaaS solutions. His passion is exploring, designing and presenting solution strategies addressing today’s challenges while preparing for the needs of tomorrow. He has devoted his 25-year career in the IP networking industry after receiving his BS Degree in Mathematics from the University of New Hampshire. Darian Bird spent ten years at IBM, where he was a principal advisor for infrastructure services and hybrid cloud in Europe. Prior to this, he was a research manager at IDC gaining emerging markets experience and headed up their offshore research team based in Kuala Lumpur. Register to attend on Tuesday 15 February (11:00 Eastern Time – for the Americas) or Thursday 17 February (11:00 GMT – for EMEA) by clicking here. For more information contact Duxbury Networking, +27 (0) 11 351 9800, info@duxnet.co.za, www.duxbury.co.za