Civil society group Outa has welcomed the introduction of the online vehicle and driver’s licencing system in South Africa, but warned that the government has slipped ‘massive cost increases’ into the new services. “It’s all very well to say that you can now have your vehicle change of ownership done from the comfort of your home, but the cost of doing so has moved from around R150 to R530, plus another R99 courier fee, which is nothing but a rip-off and an unacceptable money-making scheme,” said Andrea van Heerden, Outa senior legal project manager. “Imagine the outrage if the banking industry told its customers that transacting online will cost them 300% more than the charges applied if they came into the bank for their services. This behaviour would generate customer outrage, as the efficiencies recovered by moving into a digital space would not be passed on to the customer.” Outa said that similar trends have been seen in other government departments, where services that society once received free or at minimal cost are now being turned into profit centres. This is specifically the case with the RTMC, the Road Traffic Infringement Agency (RTIA), the Driving Licence Card Account (DCLA) and more, it said. It added that an online fee should not be higher than the fee charged at the offices; rather, the online fees should be substantially lower. When these entities start to generate excessive revenue streams, they find ways to spend this money. While he was the chief executive of RTIA, Japh Chuwe was allowed to increase his salary from an already high R3.3 million “This action by the RTMC and the Department of Transport goes completely against the spirit of what President Ramaphosa said in his State of the Nation Address to South Africa last week about reducing regulatory burdens and red tape. “Moving into the digital age should not be disguised as making it easier for society to transact with the state and then slapping the public with service fee increases to the tune of 250% and more for this benefit. This is nothing short of a gross abuse of power and must not be allowed to happen,” said Van Heerden. How much you will pay to renew your car and driver’s licence The Department of Transport gazetted the updated transaction and service fees for its upcoming online vehicle licence disc and driver’s licence card renewal system in January 2022. Most of the items on the new list now include the words “online application, issuing and delivery”. The driver’s licence card fee still excludes any mention of issuing but has been reduced from R250 to R22. The department also lists the delivery of a driver’s licence card as a service item, charged at R99. The table below shows the new fees for online renewals of licence discs, vehicle registration certificates, and driver’s licence cards.  Read: Big jump in hijackings in South Africa – these are the hotspot areas