Transport minister Fikile Mbalula has announced upgrades to the government’s NaTIS system which will make it more secure to buy and sell a motor vehicle in South Africa. In a media briefing on Thursday (17 February), Mbalula said that the online system has been enhanced to allow financial institutions, insurance companies and vehicle dealerships to register vehicles directly on the NaTIS system. This will improve convenience and help to combat rampant crime associated with the change of ownership of vehicles, he said. “Motorists will be able to access most of the services they had to travel and queue at a Driving Licence Testing Centre in the past for, from the comfort of their homes and offices,” he said. “Services that are available on the RTMC’s online platform with immediate effect include the online application, issuing and delivery of a motor vehicle licence and disc to the owner of the motor vehicle.” Mbalula said vehicle owners will also be alerted if their vehicles have been cloned on the system, and can use the system to pay outstanding traffic fines. “Participating financial institutions will be able to register vehicles online, as titleholders, this will eliminate the process of registering at a registering authority,” the Road Traffic Management Corporation (RTMC) said. “The online vehicle registration fee will be levied on all registrations performed by Financial Institutions, Motor Dealers, Insurance Companies and Large Fleet Operators. The online registration function will allow an approved entity the ability to register a vehicle to themselves as titleholders.” This online registration and release of titleholder function will allow identified institutions to record the event in real-time and ensure that the integrity of NaTIS information is enhanced and maintained, the RTMC said. “The process is also fully automated representing a significant saving in costs for the old and new titleholders.” The services will be available through the NaTIS website here.  Read: South Africa is on track for a shock petrol price increase in March – here’s why