No two businesses are the same so why should their IT solutions be? With over 35 years’ experience distributing technology to resellers throughout South Africa, this is a truth Tarsus Technology Group understands. It’s also the reason the company offers a portfolio of Dell Precision Workstations designed to cater to the unique needs of their customers. Click here to find out more about Dell Precision Workstations. From architecture and 3D modelling to video editing and economic forecasting, each Precision Workstation can be configured to match or exceed the requirements of any industry: thanks to powerful performance from Intel® Xeon® processors and professional-grade tools. So, no matter their dreams or how they plan to change the world, customers benefit from tailor-made solutions that ensure mission-critical tasks are always mission possible. Together with scalable memory, comprehensive support and award-winning industrial designs; Dell Precision Workstations feature revolutionary technologies like Dell Optimizer which ensures your clients get the most out of their technology investment. By utilising artificial intelligence and machine learning, this software dynamically optimises workstation performance; improving the overall user experience by automatically managing critical systems and ensuring, in conjunction with Intel® Adaptix™ Technology, that apps open faster and perform better. Ultimately, when clients ask for an intelligent and configurable solution featuring greater processing power, professional graphics, and ISV certification for their applications: the answer is always a Dell Precision Workstation. That’s why, along with distributing Dell’s highest performing systems, they provide resellers with personalised training and support to ensure their customers receive the correct technology – every time. As the longest-established IT distributor in the country, the company also combines its wealth of experience with a world-class warehouse management system to deliver optimised logistic support, superior service and solutions at the most affordable prices. Tarsus Technology Group can help equip your reseller business with the tools and expertise needed to increase both customer satisfaction and sales, all while enjoying access to the widest and most configurable range of Dell Precision Workstations in South Africa. You can find out more about Dell Precision Workstations here.