Axis Communications has launched a multidirectional 15 MP camera offering total situational awareness of indoor areas up to 400 m2. Featuring three 5 MP sensors and one PTZ camera with 10x optical zoom and HDTV 1080p, it delivers sweeping overviews and zoomed-in details. Click here to learn more about Duxbury Networking. From banks to retail stores the M5000 PTZ is ideal for a wide variety of indoor applications. The AXIS M5000-G PTZ offers wireless I/O connectivity with Z-Wave Plus devices. “This means that the camera can communicate with up to six devices in a system setup, for instance using on/off commands.” “Additionally, all information from Z-Wave is transferred to the VMS and displayed as overlays in the video stream,” says Clifton Greeff, National Surveillance Business Manager at Duxbury Networking, local distributors of AXIS technology. This cost-effective camera offers the benefits of four cameras while only installing one camera. “So, there’s only one camera to install, one cable to run, one IP address, and one video management software (VMS) licence to install.” “Thanks to edge storage, you can record directly to an onboard memory card for easy installation and maintenance.” “Designed to blend in seamlessly with any environment, a black dome is also available as an accessory.” “Axis Edge Vault protects your Axis device ID and simplifies authorisation of Axis devices on your network,” says Greeff. Further, with all four views displayed on one monitor, it’s possible to move from overview to detailed views in a single click. It also features autofocus capabilities as well as indication lights to help deter antisocial and criminal behaviour, ideal for retails stores and large indoor areas up to 400 m2. The camera offers great image quality and has day/night functionality with an automatically removable infrared-cut filter. “And, with autofocus capabilities, you can quickly zoom in on areas of interest.” “Thanks to polygonal privacy masking, it’s possible to pixelate whole areas where privacy is important, such as a neighbouring property.” “Plus, click in picture functionality allows you to click directly in the picture to define the central position of the selected camera.” “Furthermore, Zipstream with support for H.264 and H.265 significantly reduces bandwidth and storage requirements,” says Greeff. For more information contact Duxbury Networking, +27 (0) 11 351 9800, info@duxnet.co.za, www.duxbury.co.za