TymeBank has announced the appointment of three new executive committee members, all of whom will report directly to chief executive officer Coen Jonker, who took over the reins at the start of July. The latest appointments bring additional strength and diversity to TymeBank’s senior leadership team, as it focuses on boosting the bank’s growth trajectory and unique value proposition,” the digital bank said in a statement on Thursday (21 July). The following people have joined TymeBank’s executive committee: Yusuf Dockrat, chief financial officer Yusuf Dockrat is a qualified chartered accountant with 20 years of financial services experience. His most recent role was CFO and senior VP HBZ Bank Limited (South Africa). “As CFO of TymeBank, Yusuf will play a key role in the bank’s growth trajectory as well as developing business strategies and aligning them to financial outcomes,” said the bank. Linda Appie, chief marketing officer Linda Appie has been promoted to TymeBank CMO, with oversight for the planning and execution of the bank’s research, marketing and communication initiatives. She joined TymeBank in 2020 as head of marketing. Prior to joining TymeBank, Appie occupied brand management roles at Coca-Cola and Tiger Brands. She holds a bachelor of business science from the University of Cape Town and an MBA from GIBS. Bruce Paveley, chief technology officer Bruce Paveley has 32 years of experience in the technology field, mostly in the banking sector, the bank said. “His experience spans application development, IT, business and fraud operations, architecture, design, AWS cloud and cyber security.” He has been with Tyme Group since 2017 as head of technology innovation, Data and Infrastructure. Prior to that he held several senior roles at Standard Bank, including head: Infrastructure Products and Services and spent several years at Faritec, a listed IT services and solutions company, as a consultant to various companies. “In his new role as CTO, Bruce will be responsible for TymeBank’s IT, Cyber and Operations teams and will also play a significant role in introducing new products and services as a key business enabler,” said TymeBank. Read: Warning signs as wealthy South Africans take strain from the higher cost of living