The Ultimate Checkout brings together three of South Africa’s online greats to offer epic deals based on customer preferences. This customer-centric three-day sale (25 – 27 July 2022), which takes place annually, promises incredible deals on some of the country’s highest-rated, most searched for and most wished-for products across the Takealot Group. The Ultimate Checkout is unique in that the deals offered are based on an analysis of aggregated behaviour and trends from their respective platforms of over 6.5 million customers across takealot.com (online retail store), Superbalist.com (fashion and home) and Mr D (online food delivery). “This year, we’re once again making it easy for South Africans to find the best deals through a customer-centric approach combining the data of over 100 million searches, reviews and wish lists of more than 6.5 million online shoppers,” says Julie-Anne Walsh, Chief Marketing Officer at Takealot. “Our ability to curate deals based on products that our shoppers actually want is what really makes The Ultimate Checkout the most epic shopping experience of the year.” For the first time ever, The Ultimate Checkout will see Early Access deals released from 22 – 24 July to kick off the excitement of the sale. These deals will be a sneak peek into what is on offer during the sale and only limited stock will be available. Part of the excitement of shopping the epic deals is that shoppers also don’t have to wait long to receive their goods thanks to the speedy next-day delivery & collect options – now FREE for orders placed on takealot.com and superbalist.com shoppers during The Ultimate Checkout (25 – 27 July). Shoppers who purchase across all three platforms during The Ultimate Checkout period will stand a chance to win The Ultimate Night-in worth over R100 000 in vouchers. From appliances to tech, home decor, the latest fashion and even R33 000 worth of Mr D for a year, one lucky shopper can create their perfect night-in from the comfort of their own home. Customers are encouraged to keep an eye on all three brands’ social channels for more information and added giveaways across the three days. Set the alarm, build that wishlist, and charge all mobile and tablet devices so no deal is missed during The Ultimate Checkout! TCL 43″ Android Smart TV – now only R3,999 + get a R450 Superbalist voucher
Fitbit Charge 5 Fitness Tracker – now only R3,299 + get a R450 Superbalist voucher
Nokia X10 5G 128GB Dual Sim – Forest Green – now only R6,299 + get a R500 Mr D voucher
Everlast Ryder Bike with Bluetooth & Fitness APP– now only R2,499 + R350 Mr D voucher
Eucerin Even Pigment Perfector Body Lotion SPF7 250ml – now only R129 Up to 60% off Jeans, Dresses, Fragrances and Watches from Superbalist.com Buy One Get One Free from Burger King
John Dory’s: 20% off all seafood platters
20% off Hungry Lion South Africans like to wishlist… in fact, over 7.2 million products are added to wish lists across Takealot and Superbalist every month.
We’re searching for things all the time. Takealot, Superbalist and Mr D receive over 86 million searches monthly.
On average, almost 170 000 product reviews happen on a monthly basis across Superbalist and Takealot.
On average, over 1.2 million meals are reviewed every month on Mr D.