The Department of Sport, Arts and Culture is holding national consultations on a new B-BBEE sector code for the Events, Technical and Production Service Industry. The consultations, which are currently taking place in Gauteng, are focused on transforming the events industry which has historically lagged behind BEE targets in the sector. The discussions are expected to include industry business owners, employees, freelancers, event, technical and production companies, B-BBEE practitioners, civil society, and labour unions, the department said. “Although South Africa is one of the leading countries in Africa, the process of transformation is taking place at a slow pace, and there are still areas in the value chain that are not transformed. “A sector strategy report commissioned by the Department of Sport, Arts and Culture in 2014 confirmed that there is a need for greater intervention in the sector for transformation to occur, particularly in areas such as ownership, leadership, access to events infrastructure, skills development, and access to financial resources.” Legal sector The formation of a B-BBEE sector code for the events industry comes after President Cyril Ramaphosa’s cabinet has approved the publication of the Draft Legal Sector Code (Draft LSC) for public comment. The draft legal code comes as the legal profession does not currently have a sector code to guide it in addressing the imbalances and inequalities in the profession, cabinet said in a statement on Monday (11 July). “The objectives of these codes are to facilitate the transformation of the legal sector to achieve representation as per the country’s demographics. The code will also ensure the development of the body that will produce well-trained and competent providers of legal services,” it said. It added that the development of the draft code was overseen by the Legal Practice Council, a statutory body established in terms of Section 4 of the Legal Practice Act, and was guided by the Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment Act. “The B-BBEE Act of 2013 provides for the Minister of Trade, Industry and Competition to issue codes of good practice on black economic empowerment in the specific sectors. Members of the legal profession currently do not have a sector code to guide them in addressing the imbalances and inequalities in the legal profession,” cabinet said. The government is also expected to conclude the legislative process for the Employment Equity Amendment Bill in September 2022, in what is expected to be the vanguard of a new transformation push for the country. The bill will allow the Employment and Labour minister Thulas Nxesi to set employment equity targets for different business sectors. The minister can set targets for different occupational levels, sub-sectors or regions. The amendments would also require the government to issue contracts only to firms that have been certified as compliant with this law. The bill is currently before president Cyril Ramaphosa for consideration. Read: Strike season hits South Africa