Jobs portal CareerJunction has published its Employment Insights for June 2022, highlighting the job skills that are most in-demand in South Africa right now. The insights report replaces CareerJunction’s previous job supply and demand index, taking a more detailed look at the job sectors in the country that are currently hiring, and which positions are most sought after. The report is based on comprehensive data gathered from the Saongroup South Africa – where around 5,000 of the country’s top recruiters (both agencies and employers) advertise their positions to millions of registered jobseekers. According to the index, job offerings continued to show a positive trajectory over the past month, with online hiring activity increasing by 6% between May 2022 and June 2022. Year-on-year, hiring activity has increased by 23% between June 2021 and June 2022. In-demand job skills Finance, business & management, as well as admin, office & support, have seen the biggest increase in hiring activity in the last month. In each sector, several roles have been advertised more frequently. Finance: +12% Financial / Project Accounting
Investment Management
Accounts Payable / Receivable
Cost and Management Accounting
Purchasing andf Procurement
Bookkeeping
Risk Management Admin, office and support +7% Teller / Cashier
Admin Clerk
Health, Safety and Evironment
Client / Customer Support
Human Resources
Switchboard / Reception
Secretary Business & Management: +7% Middle / Department Management
Senior Management
Executive Management
Team Leader / Supervisor Notably, and quite a positive indicator for job seekers, there has been no significant decline in hiring activity in any job sector, Careerjunction said. On the supply side, the jobs portal noted significant growth in candidates signing up to apply for jobs in community services, welfare and the medical and health sectors. There has also been a sharp increase in the number of manufacturing & assembly skills coming into the market, with artisans, machinists, assemblers and various quality and process control skills available. According to CareerJunction, job opportunities in this sector have been growing continuously since the third quarter of 2020, with the Eastern Cape, KwaZulu Natal, the Western Cape and Gauteng driving the biggest growth of manufacturing jobs. The roles within certain sub-sectors that have been particularly driving the job growth include: Metallurgy/Boiler making
Materials Control
Production Inspector/Testing
Supply Chain Control
Quality Control
Machinist
Plant/Production Control “The highest growth rates were evident for metallurgy & boiler making jobs, materials control, production inspection/testing, and supply chain control. Since Q1:2020, hiring activity increased by between 70% and 127% across these occupational fields,” CareerJucntion said. “This growing hiring trend was also observed for quality controllers, machinists, plant/production controllers and process controllers, where demand increased by between 31% and 61% compared to Q1:2020,” it said. Some of the most in-demand job skills in the sector are for fitters, millwrights and supply chain managers. Some market-related salary offerings for top in-demand skills include: Fitter: R20,646 – R27,936
QA Engineer: R25,833 -R44,986
Plant Operator: R13,083 – R14,859 Read: These jobs are in high-demand in South Africa right now – and can earn you over R100,000 a month