President Cyril Ramaphosa says his government is making steady progress in transitioning the country away from harmful fossil fuels and aligning with global climate goals. Writing in his inaugural Presidential Climate Commission Review published on Tuesday (12 July), Ramaphosa said this transition will include the introduction of landmark new climate change laws. “For the first time, our climate targets are compatible with limiting warming to 1.5°C—a goal that all countries agreed to as part of the Paris Agreement to combat climate change. Our Climate Change Bill, which is currently being considered by Parliament, will provide the necessary legal basis for us to meet our ambitious climate commitments. “Our newly adopted National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy provides a framework to improve our resilience to extreme weather events. Indeed, advancing our nation’s development and building climate resilience are two sides of the same coin. As we strive to prove this in practice, South Africa is emerging as a model for others to follow.” Ramaphosa noted that South Africa is also set to benefit from a landmark international deal to support this transition. “At the 26th United Nations climate change conference in Glasgow in November 2021, South Africa struck a historic $8.5 billion deal with the European Union, France, Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States. “This first-of-its-kind partnership will help support a just and sustainable energy transition, ensuring energy security and access while also cutting emissions from fossil fuels. “We must get this transition right for the sake of our people, our future economic competitiveness and the global climate change effort. The research makes a clear case for action and our citizens demand it. Let us continue to seize the opportunities presented by a greener and more sustainable economy.” The end of coal? Ramaphosa noted that some South Africans will be impacted by the move away from coal, with the government set to provide support for communities and businesses impacted by the transition. The climate commission has pledged to adopt an ‘accelerated coal decommissioning schedule’ and identify financial mechanisms to support that transition. The commission has also said that it will continue to meet directly with coal miners who have already lost jobs, workers in coal-fired power stations who stand to lose jobs through decommissioning, and people who live in the surrounding communities and are dependent on mining activity to support their livelihoods. It will also continue engagements with communities, especially in rural areas and former homelands, that are most affected by climate change. “A just and inclusive transition from coal to clean energy in South Africa is a matter of social and economic justice, and hence must consider the needs of an ordinary coal miner whose livelihood depends on the coal resource. We appreciate the discussions on a just transition at PCC and the intention to engage those who matter most at the grassroots,” Ramaphosa said. Read: Makro to start selling ‘power walls’ and full solar installations in South Africa as load shedding demand grows