A new season of Life With Kelly Khumalo; Rotten Tomatoes’ Best Series of 2022 Barry S3; the finale of The Real Housewives of Lagos; the latest 007 movie No Time to Die. It’s all new on Showmax in July. Subscribe to Showmax from R39 per month, and get two weeks’ free trial.  Metacritic’s second-best-reviewed show of 2022, Barry S3 finds our title character desperate to leave his violent past as a contract killer behind in favour of his life as an actor. While Barry has eliminated many of the external factors that pushed him towards violence, he soon discovers they weren’t the only forces at play … 100% critics’ rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with Variety hailing it as “a masterpiece”. Binge now.  HBO Max’s The Sex Lives of College Girls follows four first-year roommates at the fictional Essex College in Vermont, taking on the highs and lows of the best years of their lives. The Sex Lives of College Girls has a 97% critics’ rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with AV Club saying, “The way the show tackles how teens cope with sudden freedom is both funny and truthful.” Binge now. <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> Time was named Best Miniseries at the 2022 BAFTAs, where Sean Bean (Game of Thrones) won Lead Actor and Stephen Graham was up for Supporting Actor. It scored 100% on Rotten Tomatoes. Eric is a prison officer who tries to protect those in his charge, including a newly imprisoned inmate consumed by guilt for his crime. When one of the most dangerous inmates identifies his weakness, Eric faces an impossible choice between his principles and his love for his family. Binge now.  Alan Tudyk (Firefly) stars as an alien trying to pass himself off as a small-town human doctor, solve a murder and decide whether he should go through with his secret mission to wipe out humanity. Tudyk was nominated for Best Actor at the Critics’ Choice Super Awards for the role. It has a 94% critics’ rating on Rotten Tomatoes, which calls it “one of the treats of last year.” Binge now.  Detectives try to untangle the case of the Ragdoll Killer, who has murdered six people and sewn their bodies into the shape of one grotesque body nicknamed the Ragdoll. It stars Lucy Hale (Pretty Little Liars). It has a 92% critics’ rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with The Guardian saying this “wicked Killing Eve-style thriller will make you wriggle with joy.” Binge now. The Rising: A woman realises she’s dead and hunts for her killer. Binge now.
The Investigation: True-crime drama recreating the Danish submarine case. 84% on Rotten Tomatoes. Binge now.
Ordinary Joe: One man. Three destinies. Binge now.  The 25th Bond film, No Time to Die sends Daniel Craig off with a bang in his fifth and final turn as the British MI6 agent 007. No Time to Die was the fourth-biggest box office hit of 2021 and won an Oscar for its Billie Eilish theme song. With Emmy winner Phoebe Waller-Bridge (Fleabag) co-writing the screenplay, No Time To Die has an 83% critics’ rating on Rotten Tomatoes. As TIME Magazine says, “Craig is so extraordinary he leaves only scorched earth behind.” Watch now.  The sequel to 2018’s Oscar-nominated post-apocalyptic horror pits the Abbott family against the terrors of the outside world as they’re forced to venture into the unknown, where the creatures that hunt by sound are not the only threats lurking beyond the sand path. Emily Blunt, writer-director John Krasinski and Millicent Simmonds return, alongside Cillian Murphy (Peaky Blinders) and Djimon Hounsou. It scored 91% on Rotten Tomatoes. From 14 July.  No city’s too big, no pup’s too small! Ryder and his pack of puppy hero friends go to Adventure City, where greedy Mayor Humdinger is turning the bustling metropolis into a state of chaos. Plus, there’s a courageous new girl pup on the squad: Liberty. Guest stars in this blockbuster include Jimmy Kimmel, Tyler Perry and Kim Kardashian as a fancy poodle. Stream from 18 July. Gunpowder Milkshake: Three generations of women fight back against those who could take everything from them. Starring Karen Gillan, Lena Headey, Michelle Yeoh and Angela Bassett. From 11 July.
The Conjuring 3: Ed and Lorraine Warren investigate a murder linked to demonic possession. Stream The Conjuring and 2 now, and 3 from 28 July.
In the Heights: Lin-Manuel Miranda’s Tony-winning musical. Stream from 21 July.
Worth: An attorney fights for justice for the victims of 9/11. Starring Michael Keaton. From 7 July.
Those Who Wish Me Dead: Angelina Jolie stars as a wilderness firefighter tasked with protecting a boy from a gang of hitmen. From 18 July.
The Water Diviner: Russell Crowe directs and stars as an Australian man who travels to Turkey after the Battle of Gallipoli to find his sons. From 7 July.  Season 3 of the SAFTA-winning Life With Kelly Khumalo picks up in April 2022 with #KellyKhumalo trending on Twitter again after the release of a true-crime documentary series about the death of Senzo Meyiwa and the trial of his alleged murderers about to start. Despite the ongoing conspiracy theories, Kelly’s career has never been better: her latest album went gold and Empini is her biggest hit ever. Season 3 of Life With Kelly Khumalo shows Kelly at her most raw and real. As she says in the trailer: “This is my life; this is my truth.” New episodes coming on Tuesdays. The Real Housewives of Lagos Reunion: The two-part reunion will give more insight into all the drama between Nigeria’s favourite housewives. Stream Part 1 now and Part 2 on 8 July.
Big Brother Naija S7: The latest season of Nigeria’s favourite reality show, where housemates compete for fame and fortune. From 23 July.
Boer Soek ‘n Vrou S15: The Search: The first episode of the new season introduces the new crop of farmers and invites singles to write in for the bachelor of their choice. One episode only, on 21 July.  Sons of the Sea, named Best South African Film at the 2021 Durban International Film Festival, is set in a small fishing community on the outskirts of Cape Town. SAFTA Best Actor winner Roberto Kyle (Arendsvlei) stars as Gabriel, who discovers a dead body and two bags of valuable abalone. It co-stars Brendon Daniels (Skemerdans), Nicole Fortuin (Indemnity) and newcomer Marlon Swarts. From 4 July. All 17 short films from the 2022 Silwerskerm Film Festival are coming to Showmax. Among the top award winners at the festival, Jordy Sank’s Leemtes en Leegheid won Best Short Film, Best Screenplay and the Audience Choice Award. It stars screen legend Lida Botha as a widow who creates an imaginary version of her late husband. My Beskermer, a post-apocalyptic short film in Afrikaaps about robots hunting the last humans in the Cape, won Best Director for DW Smith (Diana Mills Smith)​​. Carla Smith (Tydelik Terminaal) won Best Actress for Mila Guy’s Skyn, while Marlo Minnaar (Troukoors) was named Best Actor for Jurg Slabbert’s Aan/Af. Other award winners include Baber, Die Horries and Bennie Bingo and look out for Bergie, Bittersoet, Die Groensone, Katvis, Nagvoël, Net Ons, Sporadies Nomadies, Twintig Tone In ‘n Hangkas, Verstikking, and Vrywater. From 18 July. <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> Down So Long stars four-time SAFTA winner Tshamano Sebe (Of Good Report) as Joseph Mabena, who lives with his extended family in the Hangberg fishing community above Hout Bay in Cape Town. Apart from the two leads, all the cast comes from the community. When he is injured in a workplace accident, Joseph is offered a substantial pay-out. His family all scramble to get a share of the money, but Joseph is determined not to part with a cent. Watch now. <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> Klein Karoo 2 catches up with documentary director Frans (Projek Dina) just as life throws him a new curveball. This film is the long-awaited sequel to the Afrikaans romcom Klein Karoo. It also stars Leandie du Randt (Meisies Wat Fluit), Sisanda Henna (Trackers) and Nicole Fortuin (Alles Malan). From 25 July.  From the creators of the award-winning Chasing The Sun, Two Sides is a fascinating behind-the-scenes look at last year’s historic British & Irish Lions series against the Springboks. Rescued from the brink of cancellation and playing in empty stadiums, the tour saw a stream of drama including Rassie Erasmus’s leaked video and complaints about referees. Taking us behind the scenes of both teams and sharing great personal stories, Two Sides gives insight into how remarkable the Springboks’ achievement was. Stream now.  Take an in-depth look at a remarkable football career, from being the most hated man in England to becoming the most commercially valuable player in the world. It’s the story of his England redemption, World Cup dreams, trial by media and becoming brand Becks. 8 July on Showmax Pro and 15 July on Showmax. Stream all this and more, including all of Living the Dream with Somizi S5, latest Showmax Originals Pulse, The Wife and The Real Housewives of Durban S2 and brilliant international series like HBO’s The Righteous Gemstones and Westworld S4. It’s all streaming on Showmax, from R39 per month. Subscribe and get two months free.