Time magazine has ranked Franschhoek in the Western Cape as one of the World’s Greatest Places in 2022. The ranking includes 50 destinations from around the world that Time’s correspondents and contributors nominated for exploring because they offer new and exciting experiences. Franschhoek ranked highly for its multitude of wine farms, unique scenery, high-class food options and a range of activities on offer. “This is excellent news, which once again puts a Western Cape destination on the world map, at precisely the time we are looking to boost our visitor numbers far beyond their 2019 levels,” said the Western Cape’s provincial minister of finance and economic opportunities Mireille Wenger. The mayor of Stellenbosch municipality, Gesie van Deventer, said Franschhoek stands out for its majestic mountains surrounding the historic village to an endless array of activities, from internationally acclaimed wine farms to a wide array of local businesses. “It isn’t difficult to see where Franschhoek gets its flair – from the majestic mountains surrounding the historic village to an endless array of activities, from internationally acclaimed wine farms to a wide array of local businesses. This gem of a town has cemented itself not only as one of South Africa’s culinary capitals but also as a must-see for any local and international tourist. “We are proud that Franschhoek has made this prestigious list and welcome all visitors to our Valley with open arms. Their continued support sustains thousands of jobs.” The Western Cape has reported improved tourism figures in recent weeks after the industry was decimated by the Covid-19 pandemic. Passengers through Cape Town International Airport’s domestic terminal in May recovered to 83% when compared to the same month in 2019. International travel has also recovered since the start of 2022 as airport terminal passenger movement recovered to 74% in May 2022 when compared to May 2019. “We are immensely proud that our valley that has been recognized (once again) as one of the ‘greatest places’ in the world to visit,” said chief executive of Franschhoek Tourism, Ruth McCourt. “We continue to strive for and celebrate the diversity of our unique village that attracts both local and international visitors. And indeed, puts the whole of South Africa on the world tourism stage.” Read: People queue for hours as one of South Africa’s biggest cities runs out of water