Businesses of all sizes need flexible and scalable networking infrastructure so they can grow and adapt to the market. This is according to Ruckus Networks Director Riaan Graham, who explained that while South African businesses were once sceptical of modern technologies like the cloud, they now realise these solutions are a must for any modern organization. Click here to learn more about Ruckus Networks’ solutions. One reason for this is cloud-based business networks make it easy to generate analytics that provide real-time insight into your business – such as bottlenecks and productivity levels. “These insights allow businesses to serve their customers better and provide them with real value,” said Graham. The cloud is also valuable as a networking platform because it does not require a big CAPEX outlay – making it more affordable and scalable. This is important, as businesses have had to revaluate their costs and expenses due to inflation, the pandemic, and global hardware shortages. Additionally, the cloud supports flexible networking technologies that allow challenger businesses not only to compete with, but to leapfrog the biggest names in their industry. “Historically, customers were approached and told ‘we have these networking solutions – pick one,’” said Graham. “Now, with the right provider, these customers can get dynamic, tailored networking solutions that solve their specific needs and can adapt to new business opportunities.” To help companies achieves these benefits. Ruckus Networks’ products leverage modern networking technologies like the cloud to offer unrivalled flexibility. “For example, if you’re a small business with around 50 employees that needs a reliable Wi-Fi system without a dedicated IT team, our entry-level Unleashed solution is ideal for you,” said Graham. “Then, if you grow into a larger business with regional offices that needs to scale, our hardware is seamlessly upgradeable to full controller-based systems.” All you have to do is load Ruckus enterprise-grade software and your once-standalone system will form part of a much larger network. You can implement your Ruckus-powered network on your existing cloud solution, on the Ruckus cloud, or even on-premise. Another great benefit of using Ruckus products is they are designed to be future proof, and its technologies that were built when Wi-Fi 5 was the default have transitioned to Wi-Fi 6 seamlessly. “Our ecosystem is designed to run both legacy and the latest technologies harmoniously on a single platform that is visible through a single pane of glass,” said Graham. Ruckus Networks also has a great reputation for providing excellent Wi-Fi networks in challenging environments like stadiums and warehouses. “We are the top-rated Wi-Fi provider globally – from SME level to companies with over 250,000 apps on their networks – and this is proof that we offer the most flexible and robust solutions on the market,” said Graham. Click here to learn more about Ruckus Networks’ solutions.