South African universities could see a significant change in tuition costs with the department of higher education planning to create a new student funding model. Higher education, science and innovation minister Blade Nzimande said that the government has committed to and is working on a comprehensive student funding model for universities and colleges. The new model is planned to account for students in the ‘missing middle’ income bracket and post-graduate students who cannot secure funding. Earlier this year, the minister announced a CPI-linked increase in tuition fees for 2022, noting that the sector relies heavily on tuition and residence fee income from universities to remain operational. On average, the first year of a degree in South Africa costs approximately R62,000. BusinessTech looked at how much it costs to study a variety of degrees at some of South Africa’s top universities. The following undergraduate degrees were assessed: Bachelor of Commerce (BCom);
Bachelor of Arts (BA);
Bachelor of Science (BSc);
Bachelor of Law (LLB, undergraduate);
Bachelor of Science/Engineering (BEng). Fees are typically charged per module needed to make up the credits of a given degree; thus, the fees represented below give a broader idea of the cost of a single year of study rather than a comprehensive overview. Note: All fees were gathered from the latest yearbooks available to the public. The fees listed below give a range in which various bachelor’s degrees in the respective faculties fall. The fees are applicable to first-year studies for 2022. If a BA General was not offered, a BA Humanities was taken into account. Residence fees South Africa’s universities also offer different residence options, both on and off campus – self-catering and with food options. Prices for residences vary depending on location, size (single or double) and gender (men and women have different fees). Below are the price ranges students can expect at the various universities: Note: All residence fees exclude meal fees; only accommodation is accounted for. Read: ANC wants a ‘second Eskom’ to be introduced in South Afr.ica: report