BITM is pleased to announce it has achieved the coveted and globally recognised CREST Penetration Testing accreditation. This accreditation sets BITM apart from its competitors as it is now recognised internationally for offering a service that delivers the highest security standards to its customers. BITM is one of a hand-full of South African based businesses accredited by CREST for this discipline. Click here to learn more about BITM cyber security services. “BITM is one of a growing number of cyber security services companies that recognises the benefits of CREST accreditation and its growing influence around the world,” said Rowland Johnson, President of CREST. “With an innovative approach to IT security, BITM is now able to demonstrate that its penetration testing services have been validated to the highest standards by successfully going through the rigorous CREST accreditation process, covering business processes, data security and testing methodologies.” To provide the accreditation, CREST assessed BITM’s penetration testing services – which are designed to identify and test potential vulnerabilities in an organisation’s cyber security infrastructure. Its penetration testing services were evaluated according to industry standards using a suite of CREST-developed maturity assessment tools. CREST found that BITM’s penetration testing service offered a robust security solution to its clients providing assurance in comparison to unaccredited alternatives. BITM has always focused on aligning its penetration testing services with its clients’ needs and global standards, and this CREST accreditation is proof its philosophy is paying off. “This accreditation shows that BITM’s penetration testing service aligns with the highest legal, ethical, and technical standards,” said Christo Coetzer, Founder and Director of BITM. “We are delighted to achieve this coveted status and remain dedicated to serving our customers accordingly.” CREST is a not-for-profit accreditation and certification body representing the technical information security industry. CREST provides internationally recognised accreditations for organisations providing technical security services and professional level certifications for individuals providing vulnerability assessment, penetration testing, cyber incident response, threat intelligence and security operations centre (SOC) services. CREST Member companies undergo regular and stringent assessment, whilst CREST certified individuals undertake rigorous examinations to demonstrate the highest levels of knowledge, skill and competence. To ensure currency of knowledge in fast changing technical security environments the certification process is repeated every three years. BlueVision IT Management (BITM) is a South African home-grown multinational company that helps businesses with early intervention and cyber security threat detection. BITM believes the success of its business is built on the fact they have the best professionals in the industry. Its business is built on three core pillars which ensure that it is: practical, impactful, and creating value. These experts are equipped to help businesses solve their complex industry-specific challenges with solutions from BITM’s two divisions – products and services. BITM’s product division is based in Vancouver, Canada, and develops unique cyber security situational awareness sensors to detect industry-specific cyber security-related activities. The service division is based in South Africa, and its goal is to identify and minimise the cyber security weaknesses and risks of businesses’ cyber security controls. When you work with BITM, you therefore know you will receive the best service in the industry. Click here to learn more about BITM cyber security services.