Massmart-owned Game says it is seeing significant successes through its turnaround strategy, with the group fundamentally changing its store layout, target markets and even what it sells. “We have conducted extensive market and customer research and consulted with key players across the business in reviewing our position in South Africa’s retail landscape, with the aim of attracting and retaining emerging customer segments,” said Game’s vice president Andrew Stein. “We’ve given more space to our ownership categories in-store – including Baby, Wellness, Appliances and TVs – and changed the way we display products, to give customers a better idea of how they can fit into their lives and homes. Our customers are shopping in-store because they like to be able to see, touch and test their items. “In line with this, we have introduced an interactive zone for customers to test electronics, prams, and bikes and a living room inspiration section in our newly-expanded homeware category.” Some of the other notable changes made by the group include: Closing Dion Wired and non-performing Game stores;
Removed the sale of fresh and frozen food and replaced them with apparel;
Reviewed all items in assortment twice;
Retrained staff and personnel
Launched a new online store. After replacing fresh and frozen food with basic apparel, Game said it has sold over 2.5 million items of clothing as local customers continue to seek value alternatives for essential items during tough economic times. The retailer has also added over 300 new items to its baby offering this year to provide a more compelling assortment for parents. “So far, we’ve seen positive results from this, with sales in baby growing by 37% in stores where this change was made,” said Stein. Online store The retailer launched a refreshed website in April 2022 offering advanced sourcing logic for geo-location of products, improved search and navigation, and additional merchandise categories such as liquor – which was not available online before. “This is an important move for Game, as our research shows that many South African consumers continue to bargain hunt and look for deals online. Our online transactions grew by 164% between April and May compared to the same period in 2021, following the launch of our improved website,” said Stein. He added that the retailer is also offering in-store pick-up for online orders, in line with customer needs and queries. “We run monthly consumer surveys and have launched several initiatives to better serve the Game shopper – including installation services on appliances and electronics and a Tech Squad to assist with set-up, upgrades and security on electronic devices purchased from Game. The South African retail environment is a competitive one, and we are working hard to ensure we are adding value beyond our product offering.” Read: A look at South Africa’s new R210 million mall – that includes the first Rocomamas drive-thru