Emails, the primary method of communication for most businesses in the digital age are more valuable than ever to attackers. Statistics show that on average 90% of company security breaches are via phishing attempts. Click here to learn more about Duxbury Networking. Whether users are targeted to receive phishing emails, or they have their mailbox compromised to send spam and viruses from your organisation’s domain, the risks to your organisation are immense. Criminals often impersonate key individuals in an organisation in an attempt to trick other employees into falling for their scams. With no malware or URLs to detect, Sophos Email uses advanced Natural Language Processing (NLP) machine learning to block these targeted impersonation and Business Email Compromise attacks. NLP is a branch of artificial intelligence that focuses on helping computers to understand the way humans write and speak. This enables Sophos Email to understand words in context rather than individually to extract notions like ‘urgency’ and/or ‘requesting something’ with an email and stop the message from reaching your users. “For added protection, Sophos Email also includes a setup assistant that integrates with AD Sync to automatically identify the individuals within an organisation who are most likely to be impersonated.” “Sophos Email Protection scans all inbound mail for display name variations associated with those users, further extending protection against phishing imposters,” says Ross Anderson, Sophos Product Development Manager at Duxbury Networking. Sophos Email allows users to: Authenticate senders. Adversaries are experts at using social engineering in their attacks. That’s why Sophos Email scans all inbound messages for key phishing indicators such as brand spoofing and impersonation attempts in real-time using SPF, DKIM, and DMARC authentication techniques and email header anomaly analysis. It spots and blocks phishing emails before they reach your users.
Prevent malware. The primary threat related to phishing attacks is not the email itself but rather the techniques used to deceive individuals. Phishing emails often include malicious links and attachments, fraudsters then capitalise on these techniques using various methods to dupe the user into clicking on a malicious link, open an infected attachment or obtain personal or confidential information in the form of credential harvesting. Sophos Email Time-of-Click URL rewriting analyses all URLs as they are clicked to block or warn users of risks or potential threats, while the Sophos cloud sandbox accurately analyses all files using multi-layered analysis and state-of-the art machine learning models. This ensures the latest zero-day and unknown malware threats and as well as PUA’s are blocked.
Automatically identify your high-profile targets. Cyber-attacks using the guise of Phishing are in most cases unpredictable and go unnoticed, cunning techniques and ‘trusted’ behaviour methods are used by attackers to trick the unsuspecting victim and these methods are constantly evolving and becoming harder to detect, Sophos Email Security stays ahead of the game by continuously learning the behaviour of the latest trends and blocking threats before they compromise your business. Sophos’ cloud sandbox analyses all file processes, file activity, registry activity, and network connections to block ransomware and other forms of malware. Sophos deep learning artificial intelligence blocks zero-day malware and unwanted applications in their tracks. Microsoft 365 security. Sophos Email Security seamlessly integrates with Microsoft Office 365. API-based email security ensures a faster setup and email processing. Continuous post-delivery protection automatically removes phishing emails containing newly infected URLs as soon as the threat state changes. Direct integration with the flow of messages allows for faster processing time on all emails, while still providing the same advanced protection.
Centralise threat intelligence for faster response. Maximise security investment and identify previously unseen indicators of compromise across your environments with shared threat intelligence from endpoint and email protection in the Sophos XDR data lake. Extensive visibility across the Microsoft 365 suite, Firewalls, server workloads, mobile devices, the network and more.
Comprehensive reporting. Sophos unlocks visibility with clear dashboards, message summaries and detailed threat reports from one dashboard.
Increase efficiency. Sophos’ single cloud management platform (Sophos Central) is one pane of glass, IT professionals can take advantage and manage their endpoint and server protection, device encryption, Wi-Fi, firewalls, email protection and more from one console. “Sophos Email security is part of a broader ecosystem of protection offered by Sophos, uniquely connected to automate threat detection and response,” says Anderson. For more information contact Duxbury Networking, +27 (0) 11 351 9800, info@duxnet.co.za, www.duxbury.co.za