The Department of Transport is investigating a new ‘traffic management levy’ which will help with the financing of traffic management resources at both the provincial and national level. The proposed tax is included in a revised white paper published by the department this past week. The department indicates that the tax could be added to existing vehicle licence fees and/or fuel sales. “A balanced funding policy on road traffic must be introduced. Spending priorities must be re-evaluated in the road and road-traffic environment in view of traffic quality-related road user needs, the adverse economic impact of inadequate levels of road traffic management, and the expected benefits of increased spending on traffic management,” the department said. It added that existing funding, budgeting and prioritising procedures will be adapted to ensure increased availability of funds for traffic management purposes. “Additional and innovative funding strategies for traffic management functions will be investigated and introduced. This will include the allocation of a percentage of the roads budget for traffic control purposes. The introduction of a traffic-management levy to vehicle licence fees and fuel sales will be investigated.” The department said that it also plans to improve fine-collection procedures relating to traffic offences, penalties for non-payment, confiscation of movable property and demerit systems will be improved and fully implemented. “The desirability of apportioning traffic fines and bails to road-traffic management funds instead of fines accruing to individual authorities and general state or provincial revenue funds will be explored. For this purpose, dedicated national and provincial road-traffic management funds will be considered,” it said. Improved reaction times The department has also pledged to improve ‘incident management’, including the rendering of medical rescue services after accidents have occurred. “The development, implementation and operation of incident management plans would improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the services rendered and minimise reaction times. “Specific attention should be given to the procedures for the management of incidents where dangerous substances are involved. The necessary emergency systems to deal with the various types of dangerous material should be developed.” It added that the coordination and cooperation between the various parties concerned with providing road-traffic-related emergency services is inadequate and needs to be improved. Read: Government expected to intervene on petrol prices in South Africa: finance minister