Massmart-owned retailer Game has launched a new online store which it says forms the next step in its turnaround strategy. The store has been supported by an investment from Massmart and a dedicated support team in Walmart’s global tech hub in Bangalore, India, the group said. Game said the new website is equipped with new features, functionalities, and product categories – aimed at providing a more streamlined experience for the customer. It added that the new site has already seen some success, with the retailer reporting a more than 100% growth in online sales month-to-date when compared to April 2021. Some of the new website features include: Advanced sourcing logic;
Order tracking;
Online returns;
A brand new pickup option for customers and categories that were previously unavailable online – such as liquor and clothing. “This is a significant step in the transformation of our business through our turnaround strategy and is evidence of the investment that Walmart and Massmart are making in Game,” said Andrew Stein, vice president of Game. “70% of our customers visit our website via mobile so it was important that we developed our website to be mobile responsive while addressing some important consumer pain points.” Game said its online store’s intelligent system logic will now allow geo-location of products for faster and more efficient deliveries and near real-time stock availability updates. The retailer will also be offering a Pickup feature in select stores – powered by the new website – where customers can order online and collect in-store. Currently, this is available in 20 stores, with additional stores rolling out throughout the year. “This is a feature we are particularly excited about, as our consumers have shown interest in this for some time.” “The website will continue to evolve, with new features being added each month, as we continue our drive to remain relevant, transform our business and grow with our consumers. Our aim is to provide a more streamlined shopping experience for all our customers,” said Stein. Read: Irish group opens R650 million plant in South Africa