Much of today’s security isn’t built to face modern challenges. It’s too slow, and reactive to threats rather than proactive. Click here to learn more about Duxbury Networking. Threats grow more complex every day, and existing cybersecurity offerings struggle to keep up. There’s a steady stream of new malware created every single day. Powered by A.I., Sophos utilises deep learning technologies to secure critical business information 24/7. “By integrating deep learning, an advanced form of machine learning, Intercept X for Server is changing server security from a reactive to a predictive approach to protect against both known and never-seen-before threats.” “While many products claim to have machine learning, not all machine learning is created equally.” “Deep learning has consistently outperformed other machine learning models for malware detection,” says Ross Anderson, Sophos Product Development Manager at Duxbury Networking. Some features of Sophos Intercept X for Server include: Exploit prevention stops the techniques used in file-less, malware-less, and exploit-based attacks. While there are millions of pieces of malware in existence, and thousands of software vulnerabilities waiting to be exploited, there are only handful of exploit techniques attackers rely on as part of the attack chain – and by taking away the key tools hackers love to use, Intercept X stops zero-day attacks before they can get started.
Anti-ransomware: Today’s ransomware attacks often combine multiple advanced techniques with real-time hacking. To minimise your risk of falling victim you need advanced protection that monitors and secures the whole attack chain. Sophos Intercept X for Server gives you advanced protection capabilities that disrupt the whole attack chain including deep learning that predictively prevents attacks and CryptoGuard which rolls back the unauthorised encryption of files in seconds.
Cloud native security: Secure your Windows and Linux deployments whether they are in the multi-cloud, on-premises, virtual or a mix of them all. Deployment across mixed setups is straightforward, using a singular agent. Policies can also be applied to all servers even in mixed environments, making deployment, configuration and management quick and easy.
Deep learning technology: By integrating deep learning, an advanced form of machine learning, Intercept X for Server is changing server security from a reactive to a predictive approach to protect against both known and never-seen-before threats. While many products claim to have machine learning, not all machine learning is created equally. Deep learning has consistently outperformed other machine learning models for malware detection.
Linux detection: When uptime is your no.1 requirement, security tools must be lightweight and integrate into your DevSecOps workflows to prevent risk and optimise application performance. Sophos protection for Linux identifies sophisticated attacks as they happen without requiring a kernel module, orchestration, baselining, or system scans. Avoiding costly downtime, overloaded hosts, or stability snafus caused by traditional security tools with a single agent with optimised resource limits (including CPU, memory, and data collection limits).
Server Lockdown (whitelisting) ensures that only the applications you want on your servers can be run. It only takes a single click and it doesn’t require server downtime. File integrity monitoring (FIM) notifies you if attempts are made to tamper with critical files. “Deep learning makes Intercept X for Server smarter, more scalable, and more effective against never-seen-before threats.” “Intercept X for Server leverages deep learning to outperform security solutions that use traditional machine learning or signature-based detection alone,” says Anderson. For more information contact Duxbury Networking, +27 (0) 11 351 9800, info@duxnet.co.za, www.duxbury.co.za