Core Group and Apple have partnered to launch the Apple Reseller Program in South Africa. Click here for more information on the Apple Reseller Program The program empowers IT Resellers with the ability to provide Apple hardware and accessories to their customers across the country. IT Resellers are now able to purchase directly from a dedicated Apple Reseller Portal that is accessible via the Core Group website. The portal also gives IT Resellers access to a number of added benefits aimed at assisting in marketing and selling the Apple products to their customers. These benefits include preferential pricing; credit financing options; marketing toolkits and on-going training for sales staff. The real benefit that an IT Reseller would have in joining the Apple Reseller Program is the opportunity to get in on the biggest growth story in tech, the Apple Silicon revolution. During Covid-19, the PC market’s two year compounded growth hit 13%, however, the standout story is Apple. In 2021, Apple shipped 28.9 million Mac Models, driving a Year-on-Year growth of 28.3%, and, with 2022 set to only increase the uptake of PC’s, Apple is set to see further extensive growth. The short answer is no. In order to qualify for this program, you have to be a registered South African business, with an active small to medium business customer base. You must be willing to proactively offer Apple products and solutions to your customer base and take part in training on Apple products and solutions. In order to sign up for the Apple Reseller Program, businesses must go through a fairly straight forward process. Step 1: The first step is to visit the core.co.za website, this is where you’ll get more information on the program and you’ll be able to register as a reseller. Step 2: The next step is to fill out the necessary online form where required. This includes giving your name and contact information, as well as providing necessary information about your business. Once your business has been qualified, you will have exclusive access to the Apple Reseller Program portal, which will allow you to access a wide range of products and tools. The Apple Reseller Program is an exceptional opportunity for IT Resellers who provide tech hardware, software and services to small and medium size businesses, to partake in the Apple growth story. Further information on the Apple Reseller Program is available on the Core Reseller Portal; direct inquiry on our contact page, call us on +27 11 535 9000, or email us on info.ARP@core.co.za