EFF leader Julius Malema has announced plans to introduce the Relocation of Parliament Bill in the coming weeks, which would see the relocation of the seat of parliament from Cape Town to Pretoria. In an explanatory memorandum gazetted this week, Malema said parliament’s current location in Cape Town creates several problems for MPs and other politicians due to its current location. “Parliament is located in the farthest province from the majority of provinces, making it inaccessible to the majority of South Africans, including members of parliament who spend a significant amount of time travelling to and from parliament. As a result, participation in parliamentary programs is limited to individuals and institutions with financial resources, excluding those unable to travel to Cape Town, he said. “As a result, parliament and the government spend a lot of money on travel and lodging for members of parliament, the executive, the government, and state officials in order to keep colonial agreements that separate administrative and legislative capital in two cities by racist colonisers who excluded the majority of black people and still does so today.” South Africa has three capitals: Cape Town, in the City of Cape Town metropolitan municipality, Western Cape, is the legislative capital and is where the country’s Parliament is found.
Bloemfontein, in Mangaung metropolitan municipality, Free State, is the judicial capital and home to the Supreme Court of Appeal.
Pretoria, in Tshwane metropolitan municipality, Gauteng, is the administrative capital, seat of the president and his cabinet at the Union Buildings. Historical precedent The EFF has previously argued that such a move will help reduce costs, with members of parliament expected to maintain additional residences, vehicles and facilities in Cape Town, despite not living in the city. While recent fire damage has renewed focus on a potential move, shifting parliament to Pretoria has been mooted for more than two decades. Most recently, in February 2021, the Joint Standing Committee on Financial Management supported parliament’s move to Pretoria. Co-chairperson of the committee, Dikeledi Mahlangu, said that although the committee is mindful of ‘certain onerous processes’ that still need to be followed before a move could take place, the committee is in full support of the idea. “We share the same understanding with those members of parliament who hold a view that parliament should move from Cape Town to Pretoria, and we appreciate the fact that a commitment has been made on the side of the institution regarding this matter,” she said.  Read: Government expected to intervene on petrol prices in South Africa: finance minister