My Rewards Club is the best way for your business to provide remuneration benefits to your employees and is run by leading rewards programme provider Direct Rewards who’ve been around for eight years. click here to learn more about My Rewards Club My Rewards Club  (MRC) gives your employees instant access to thousands of Rands in savings every month by offering  an incredible range of discounts, coupons, and cashback offers from South Africa’s top brands. MRC is delivered via mobile app, is available in all App Stores, provides an end to end employee service journey and can be used when recruiting new staff. You can also improve your employee retention rate by incorporating this into your staff remuneration packages. My Rewards Club retails to consumers for just R99 per month and offers value in excess of R3,500 in monthly saving  – making it an amazing offering. Corporates, however, can get an even better deal for their workforces, as My Rewards Club reduces this monthly per-person cost when your business completes a bulk signup. Once you have added this service to your employees’ remuneration packages, they will receive the following benefits: Dining at over 2,000 restaurants – up to R1200 pm cashback when dining at restaurants like Col’Cacchio, Mozambik, John Dory’s, and Mike’s Kitchen to mention but a few.
Health and Wellness – 50 monthly coupons worth a combined R1,250 per month from Dis-Chem Pharmacies.
Travel – Up to 15% off Eldo Coaches and R75 cashback when flying with FlySafair.
Fast food – Monthly discounts of up to R200 per month from Nando’s, Debonairs Pizza, Burger King, Milky Lane, and Steers.
Retail Vouchers and Gift Cards – Up to 10%  off at Woolworths,  Edgars, Style, Beaver Canoe, Legit, Disc-Chem, Shoprite, and TFG stores.
Sporting Events – Up to 50% off Soccer, Cricket and Rugby tickets.
Entertainment – Up to 50% off movie tickets from Ster Kinekor and NuMetro.
Groceries – 50 monthly coupons worth a combined R1,250 per month from Shoprite and Checkers. This extensive list proves that My Rewards Club provides thousand of rands in savings and value for your employees’ remuneration packages without costing your own business hundreds of extra rand per worker. The good news is that your employees’ will not have to earn points or perform complicated redemption processes to take advantage of this amazing value add – everything is available to each member immediately.  MRC is all about instant gratification 24/7 in the palm of your hand. Therefore, if you’re a key business decision maker who wants to boost morale by improving your employees’ remuneration without breaking the bank, Contact Amanda to learn more about My Rewards Club. And If you’re a key business decision maker who is looking for loyalty and rewards provider that takes the hassle out of loyalty and can design a bespoke programme for you, then you need look no further than Direct Rewards. Direct Rewards are tech driven, provide turnkey solutions that offer instant gratification and deliver Real Time Value across technology channels  click here to learn more.