Power utility Eskom has announced that it will implement stage 2 load shedding Saturday evening, following the loss of generating capacity on its network. Load shedding will hit from 17h00 until 22h00. Load shedding has been implemented between 17h00 and 22h00 every day this week, with losses on the grid going as high as 16,000MW due to breakdowns. While generating capacity was slowly returning to operation on Friday, it was not enough to avoid load shedding entirely. The group lost five generating units on Saturday, with a delay in the return of 650MW in planned maintenance to the grid. It is currently experiencing 17,810MW in breakdowns. Eskom warned that load shedding in the same time slots will likely be implemented in the coming week if generating capacity does not improve. “Load shedding is likely to be repeated at the same time throughout the coming week if the capacity shortages persist. Eskom will continue to closely monitor the system and communicate any changes as may be necessary.” Eskom said the onset of winter has seen increased demand and this will lead to capacity constraints throughout this period, particularly during the evening and morning peaks. “Unfortunately, this would generally require the implementation of load shedding during the evening peaks,” it said. Eskom urged all South Africans to continue using electricity sparingly, especially between 05h00 and 09h00 in the mornings and 16h00 and 22h00 in the evenings.  Schedules For people living in the major metros, load shedding schedules are available here: City of Johannesburg
City of Ekurhuleni 
City of Tshwane 
City of Cape Town (PDF)
Nelson Mandela Bay
eThekwini
Manguang
Buffalo City For access to other load shedding schedules, Eskom has made them available on loadshedding.eskom.co.za. Smartphone users can also download the app EskomSePush to receive push notifications when load shedding is implemented, as well as the times the area you are in will be off. Read: Expect electricity prices to double in the next five years, says former Eskom consultant