FNB has announced several changes for all of its clients in the coming months as it aims to increase both its unassisted and face-to-face interactions. The bank said this will include changes for private banks, the further modernisation of its branches and a shift in how it deploys its staff. Private bankers FNB said it will transition its ‘private bankers’ to ‘private advisors’, which will allow its clients to “get more out of their relationship with the bank”. Private Advisors will be equipped and accredited to provide integrated advice to help clients unlock cash flow in transacting and lending activities, thus enabling them to save and invest more and protect their assets and loved ones. Furthermore, FNB said it would significantly increase the number of private advisors to improve the quality of engagements across client segments. “Traditionally, private banking was mostly about providing personalised services for day-to-day client needs,” said Raj Makanjee, FNB Retail and Private Banking chief executive. “However, we’re evolving our approach towards providing integrated advice across the banking, lending, investment and insurance needs of our clients. Through integrated advice underpinned by the efficiency of our platform, we want to help our retail and private banking clients and their families realise value across the full range of our solutions and services. “We are doing this in response to changing client needs and as part of our commitment to providing client-centric solutions,” he said. New branches FNB said it plans to continue modernising its branch network, focusing on digitisation, enhanced client service, and optimal cash solutions for clients. This will include optimising space and design, and future branches will average 350m2 in size rather than the current 460 square metres. It is also regularly reviewing its branch footprint and location and the services required in the communities where it operates. FNB built nine new branches in local markets or communities and refurbished 53 branches in the current financial year, with another three new branches which are in the process of being built as well as another 34 refurbishments in progress. FNB plans to build an additional 27 new community branches and refurbish approximately 90 branches in the 2023 financial year. “Our strategy in our branch network is premised on the modernisation of infrastructure and service model for assisted and unassisted client needs. While we promote the digitisation of services to make our clients’ lives convenient and easier, we also recognise that there is no technological substitute for personalised advice. “As a result, we believe that clients who use our branches should be able to perform day-to-day banking through our digital zones, with the option to consult with our experts for human assistance as needed,” Makanjee said. Shift in working Makanjee said it plans to transition the employees in its branches from administrative to frontline roles to advise clients on better managing their money. “Our private advisors, many of whom are already highly qualified and experienced, have undergone extensive training and accreditation through an internal private banking academy. “We firmly believe that our advice and service model enable us to better serve clients and augment our value in their lives,” said Makanjee. eBucks In April 2022, FNB announced several new features for its eBucks and banking programmes as part of a growing push towards offering ‘lifestyle solutions’. Some of the notable changes include: Starbucks: Customers can recharge with a complimentary coffee weekly on FNB.
Udemy: giving FNB customers affordable access to hundreds of online courses.
GuardMe: a medical and personal armed response service at a tap of a button on the FNB App.
eBucks games: a world of ad-free games with no monthly subscription.
FNB Connect ‘Hero Device Deals’: High end smartphones, laptops and iPads from Apple, Samsung and Lenovo at a price point that is cheaper than buying from retail stores.
SLOW lounge: FNB announces the official acquisition of the SLOW Lounges. “Our expanded lifestyle solutions demonstrate our commitment to delivering contextual innovations to our customers via our trusted digital platform. “In keeping with our status of providing customers with the best value-added services in financial services, we are once again shifting into high gear in our efforts to offer customers exponential help, said FNB chief executive Jacques Celliers. “We are delighted to have like-minded partners as we are significantly scaling our unique ability to enable customers to manage both the financial and lifestyle facets of their lives by using the power of our integrated platform.” Read: IMF warns against global economic fragmentation from Ukraine war