The Walt Disney Group has confirmed that it will offer a broad catalogue of television shows and movies when its Disney+ streaming launches in South Africa on 18 May. In a virtual media briefing on Thursday (5 May), the group said that in addition to a back catalogue of over 1,000 movies and 1,500 shows, there will be over 200 original series, movies, and specials at launch. Walt Disney Company Africa senior vice president and general manager, Christine Service said that Walt Disney had high hopes for the South African market, where Walt Disney has been active for over 50 years. To illustrate its local influence, Service pointed out that  Disney accounts for 11 of the top 20 grossing movies of all time at the South African box office. Some of the key features of the catalogue include: All of the Star Wars content released to date;
Marvel shows and movies – including new shows such as Moonknight;
The Disney ‘vault’, including the group’s animated classics;
More adult-focused shows such as ‘Pam and Tommy’ and ‘Grey’s Anatomy’;
The National Geographic catalogue – including documentaries and series;
All 33 seasons of The Simpsons and other general entertainment content through its Star platform. The service permits four concurrent streams at the same time, unlimited downloads on up to ten devices, and the ability to set up to seven different profiles, including the ability for parents to set kids profiles. All titles can be streamed at up to 1080p resolution, while a selection is also available in 4K HDR. Dolby Atmos virtual surround sound. It will be available online, through the various mobile app stores and connected devices. The group also confirmed a deal with the MultiChoice Group which will be available to DStv subscribers via the Explora Ultra decoder on launch day. The group said the service will launch in the country and other territories on 18 May with pricing ser at R119 per month or R1,190 for an annual subscription. The company is also offering an exclusive introductory offer for customers who opt to sign-up for the service early. The document below details all the content coming to the platform at launch.  Read: DStv to include Disney+ streaming service for subscribers