The Gauteng provincial government has announced plans to upgrade the Grayston interchange and other major roads in the province in an effort to reduce traffic flows. Located on the M1, Grayston Drive is a major feeder road carrying traffic from the N1 highway into the Sandton precinct. The precinct, which is often been described as the richest mile in Africa, is home to some of the country’s largest banks, and houses headquarters for other major businesses including the ‘top five’ legal firms. The upgrade is expected to include a partnership with the private sector, with the aim of improving traffic flow around the area, the provincial government said. Gauteng’s department of transport has committed R8.75 billion to ‘catalyse’ contributions to the province’s economic recovery efforts post the Covid-19 pandemic. “As part of safeguarding these funds and ensuring that the people of our province get value for money, we have appointed an independent, reputable legal firm with extensive experience in contract law to help us manage time, costs, and quality as the critical components of transport infrastructure delivery,” said transport boss Jacob Mamobolo. Some of the multi-year road construction projects which have already been confirmed include: Vaal River City – construction of the new interchange and access roads along R42 (Barrage Road) in Vereeniging; K101 Phase 1– upgrading to a dual carriageway of Road P1/2 (K101) (Old Pretoria /Johannesburg Road) from N1 Rooihuskraal Interchange to Road D795; K14 – upgrading of the single carriageway (K14) from P2-5 (R513) Cullinan Road to Rayton Road D483 (R516) to bypass Cullinan; K46 Phase 2 – upgrading of William Nicol between PWV5 (Jukskei River) and Diepsloot; K15 Phase 3 – upgrading of K15 (Adcock Road) between K102 (Main Str) Dobsonville to Wild Chestnut Street in Protea Glen; K56 – upgrade between K46 (William Nicol Drive) and P79/1 (Main RD) and extension of Erling Road; K73 – upgrading of Road K73 between Woodmead Drive and Allandale Road (D58); P39/1 – heavy rehabilitation from Diepsloot to Muldersdrift, approximately a distance of 14 kilometres; P175/1 – rehabilitation of Road P175/1 from Vanderbijlpark to Potchefstroom Phase 2. New highway Mamabolo has also indicated that his department is also in the process of finalising the design of a major new freeway development in the province. Presenting his departmental budget speech on Friday (20 May), Mamabolo said the object of the freeway is to provide additional capacity to the OR Tambo International Airport. This will also help realise the government’s plan to turn the area surrounding the airport into a major trade and logistics hub. The planned highway development has been designated the label ‘PWV15’. “We made our way through tracing the path of the planned PWV15 that will serve as a second major freeway supporting the airport, all the way through to N12, N17, N3 and the planned OR Tambo/ Springs freight and logistics hub. “The developments in this corridor, the vision for expansion at the Airport and the vision for a large freight and logistics hub will bring many more people the kind of connections that are needed to have access to opportunity and to grow the economy. “It was an important visit in which the department recommitted to build the critical roads to support the vision of this corridor and smart mobility.” Read: Cape Town is getting new traffic lights – with plans to roll them out to the rest of South Africa