With evening peak supply constraints persisting, Eskom has announced stage 2 load shedding will again be implemented from 17h00 – 22h00 on Tuesday evening (10 May). The power utility warned of the possibility of higher stages should any further breakdowns occur during the day. “The onset of winter has seen increased demand and this will lead to severe capacity constraints throughout this period, particularly during the evening and morning peaks. Unfortunately, this would generally require the implementation of load shedding during the evening peaks. “Tonight stage 2 load shedding will be implemented between 17h00 and 22h00, with the possibility of higher stages should any further generation unit breakdowns occur before then.” Eskom said a generation unit each at the Kusile and Arnot power stations are expected to return to service this afternoon. Since yesterday evening, a unit each at Arnot, Grootvlei and Matla power stations either tripped or were taken offline for repairs. At the same time two units were returned to service; one each at Kriel and Grootvlei power stations. Eskom said it currently has 3,049MW on planned maintenance, while another 15 762MW of capacity is unavailable due to breakdowns. “Eskom would like to remind the public that load shedding is implemented only as a last resort to protect the national grid. We, therefore, urge all South Africans to continue using electricity sparingly especially
between 05h00 – 09h00 in the mornings and 16h00 – 22h00 in the evenings. “Eskom will promptly communicate should there be any significant changes to the power system.” Schedules For people living in the major metros, load shedding schedules are available here: City of Johannesburg
City of Ekurhuleni 
City of Tshwane 
City of Cape Town (PDF)
Nelson Mandela Bay
eThekwini
Manguang
Buffalo City For access to other load shedding schedules, Eskom has made them available on loadshedding.eskom.co.za. Smartphone users can also download the app EskomSePush to receive push notifications when load shedding is implemented, as well as the times the area you are in will be off. Read: Ford aims to take South African mega-factory off Eskom’s grid