Power utility Eskom says it will increase load shedding to stage 4 on Monday evening (16 May). This follows the loss of further generating units. Stage 4 load shedding will take place between 17h00 and 22h00 on Monday evening. “Unit 2 of the Kusile Power Station tripped earlier this afternoon, taking 720MW of generating capacity with it,” the power utility said. “While this unit has since returned to service, it will slowly load up to capacity during the night.” Losses due to breakdowns are at 17,255MW, it said. Load shedding is expected to continue in the same time slot throughout the week. As previously announced, stage 3 load shedding is still expected on Tuesday, with stage 2 from Wednesday.  Eskom chief operating officer, Jan Oberholzer, warned earlier on Monday that an increase in load shedding from Stage 3 to Stage 4 could happen if the power utility failed to gather enough generation capacity to feed national peak demand. According to Oberholzer, Eskom suffered at least eight major breakdowns at its power stations – exacerbating strain on the already fragile and constrained power system. Oberholzer said that Eskom’s emergency reserves will come under pressure because of increased dependence. “We are currently burning two million litres of diesel per day and it is significant. For the month to date, we have burnt 40 million litres already. So we have to look at our emergencies that we don’t run out of diesel. The water [plants] look fine but we may be forced to use more water. We have to make sure that we don’t deplete our emergencies. “Depending on how much we need to use our emergencies, we may be forced to implement load shedding throughout the day. We will try our best to avoid that but unfortunately, that risk does exist,” he said. Since the beginning of May, the power utility has turned to implementing load shedding between 17h00 and 22h00 in an attempt to claw back some lost generation capacity and secure the national power grid. Schedules For people living in the major metros, load shedding schedules are available here: City of Johannesburg
City of Ekurhuleni 
City of Tshwane 
City of Cape Town (PDF)
Nelson Mandela Bay
eThekwini
Manguang
Buffalo City For access to other load shedding schedules, Eskom has made them available on loadshedding.eskom.co.za. Smartphone users can also download the app EskomSePush to receive push notifications when load shedding is implemented, as well as the times the area you are in will be off. Read: Expect electricity prices to double in the next five years, says former Eskom consultant