Mobile payments platform, Zapper, says that merchants can now accept tap-on-phone payments. The new functionality gives them access to virtually all digital payments without the need for any additional point of sale hardware and irrespective of whether consumers have the Zapper app. “After a successful pilot phase, we have rolled out new functionality available to all Zapper merchants, which enables them to accept physical card payments as well as mobile wallet payments,” said Zapper CEO Brett White. This includes Samsung Pay, Apple Pay, and Garmin Pay. All consumers in South Africa will be able to make use of the new payment option whether they have the Zapper consumer app on their phone or not. The upgrade also supports pin-on-glass functionality, which means consumers who have exceeded their verification limit can safely enter their pin on the merchant’s Android smartphone and proceed with their transaction in the same manner as they would on a normal pin entry device when checking out. “Previously our merchant app was primarily a tool for our merchants to get their payment confirmation feeds through a push notification, in real-time, eliminating the need to wait for an SMS, email, or logging into the merchant portal online. It also allowed merchants to generate a QR code or payment link quickly and easily. Now, the app also turns the merchant’s phone into a point-of-sale device without the need for any additional peripheral hardware,” said White. “Our Zapper Merchant app will still enable shoppers to easily scan and pay the app generated Zapper QR code or alternatively tap and pay using their physical bank card or mobile wallets. The primary aim of our latest offering is to ensure our merchants can accept as many payment methods as possible.” Apart from the Zapper traditional scan-to-pay QR options, Zapper merchants are now able to accept a comprehensive suite of payment options. This includes vouchers, mobile wallets, and third-party options integrated onto the Zapper network including: Ozow; Buy Now Pay Later options such as MoreTyme; some cryptocurrency in the form of 6dot50; and now the card-present payments via the tap-on-phone offering – all through a single account. Read: Uber now lets you send larger packages with its on-demand delivery service