Eskom has announced the resignation of its group executive for generation, Phillip Dukashe. In a statement on Monday (9 May), the power utility said Dukashe’s last day will be on 31 May 2022. “In his resignation letter and discussions with Eskom executives, Mr Dukashe has cited the critical need to achieve a balance for the benefit of his health, family and work responsibilities,” said Eskom. “Phillip leaves behind a competent team to ensure sustainability of the generation division.” Rhulani Mathebula will act in the interim as the group executive for generation while the recruitment process is initiated, Eskom said. Mathebula is a seasoned power station general manager and had acted as group executive generation prior to Phillip’s appointment. “We salute Phillip for his rich legacy of selfless leadership, integrity and excellence in serving Eskom and the country for the past 26 years and for always standing up and doing what is right and honourable. “Phillip’s vast institutional knowledge, cross-functional skills and sound executive leadership experience created the much-needed stability in the generation division during his tenure and achieved some significant strides in helping to turn around generation’s poor performance since his permanent appointment into the position from April 2021.”  Power warning In a separate statement on Monday, Eskom announced warned the South African public that, with the power system severely constrained during the evening peaks, load-shedding is likely should there be further unit breakdowns. Currently, the power utility has 3,049MW offline on planned maintenance and 14,985MW of capacity unavailable due to breakdowns. “While the power system has recovered sufficiently to fully meet the demand during the day, Eskom would like to caution the public that load-shedding might be required at short notice during the evening peaks should there be further breakdowns in currently available capacity,” Eskom said. The power utility added that it expects to return a generation unit each at the Kusile and Kendal power stations before the evening peak on Monday. Read: How much green energy South Africa needs to produce over the next 30 years: minister