Toyota South Africa Motors has warned that it could face stock challenges in the coming months as local and global supply-chain issues hit. The group, which sold close to 9,000 vehicles across the country in April, is still reeling from the disaster caused by floods in KwaZulu-Natal last month. “April is traditionally a slow month for retail due to the numerous public holidays – but the situation was compounded by the flooding at our plant in Prospecton, Durban. “We are anticipating stock challenges with regards to our locally-built models such as Hilux, Fortuner, Corolla Cross and Quest, Hiace Ses’fikile and some Hino models,” said Leon Theron, the group’s senior vice president of sales and marketing. “A big thank-you to our customers for being patient with us. Please be assured that every single one of your orders is receiving the attention it deserves. We are a tough organisation, operating in a resilient nation – we will come back stronger.” Toyota’s Prospecton plant was heavily damaged by the floods and remains closed as the group prepares to restart operations. The group reportedly had to scrap thousands of water-damaged vehicles, while 500 units had passed inspection and would be retailed. The National Association of Automobile Manufacturers of South Africa indicated that the widespread flooding and damage to parts of KwaZulu-Natal in April is likely to place general logistics constraints on the country’s automotive sector. The Port of Durban handles 60% of the country’s shipments and transporting of goods and commodities to and from nations in the region as far north as the Democratic Republic of Congo. KwaZulu-Natal province is the second-biggest contributor to South Africa’s gross domestic product. The issue has been compounded by global supply-chain problems due to the lingering effects of the Cpovid-19 pandemic, a global chip shortage, the war in Ukraine and another shutdown in Shanghai. Read: 13 of the cheapest cars you can buy in South Africa right now