The AXIS D4100-E allows users to prevent intrusion on their perimeter or signal access denied/granted at parking areas with a boom gate. “When people safety is your top priority and you want to be able to signal if an area is safe in an emergency, the AXIS D4100-E network strobe siren provides an extra layer of security,” says Clifton Greeff, National Surveillance Business Manager at Duxbury Networking, local distributors of AXIS technology. Click here to learn more about Duxbury Networking. Through VAPIX, MQTT or SIP the device offers numerous integration possibilities. “For example, it can be connected to a camera with perimeter protection or licence plate recognition (LPR) analytics; or to an Axis network speaker for an increased level of deterrence.” “Thanks to MQTT, it can also be tied to third-party internet of things (IoT) systems,” says Greeff. The AXIS D4100-E can be customised to suit the user’s environment, allowing them to choose from various white and RGBA light patterns and pre-configured sounds. “For instance, in a hospital ward, you can trigger only the strobe light and not the alarm, thereby preventing the patients from being disturbed.” “You can also set up profiles with different priority levels, and if triggered, a profile with a higher priority will override a current profile.” “Furthermore, this robust, IP66-, NEMA-4X- and IK10-rated device offers an optional sunshield for daytime outdoor use,” adds Greeff. The AXIS D4100-E is cost-efficient to install, configure, and maintain. A strobe light and a siren in one device means users spend less time on installation. Fewer cables and other mounting accessories are needed, and PoE further cuts cabling costs. Thanks to a simple, web-based interface, users can quickly configure one device and copy and deploy the setup to others on the system. Scheduled health checks at the user’s preferred frequency mean lower costs for on-site inspection. “Plus, you’ll be immediately notified if something is wrong,” says Greeff. For more information contact Duxbury Networking, +27 (0) 11 351 9800, info@duxnet.co.za, www.duxbury.co.za