Eskom has announced that it will again implement load shedding on Friday night during peak demand hours. As was the case since Monday, stage 2 blackouts will hit South Africans between 17h00 and 22h00 on Friday evening. While some generation capacity has been restored, and more units are expected to return during the day and over the weekend, Eskom said this is still not enough to meet demand. Eskom said the onset of winter has seen increased demand and this will lead to capacity constraints throughout this period, particularly during the evening and morning peaks. “Unfortunately, this would generally require the implementation of load shedding during the evening peaks,” it said. Eskom urged all South Africans to continue using electricity sparingly, especially between 05h00 and 09h00 in the mornings and 16h00 and 22h00 in the evenings.  Schedules For people living in the major metros, load shedding schedules are available here: City of Johannesburg
City of Ekurhuleni 
City of Tshwane 
City of Cape Town (PDF)
Nelson Mandela Bay
eThekwini
Manguang
Buffalo City For access to other load shedding schedules, Eskom has made them available on loadshedding.eskom.co.za. Smartphone users can also download the app EskomSePush to receive push notifications when load shedding is implemented, as well as the times the area you are in will be off. Design defects Deputy president David Mabuza said Thursday (12 May), that the Political Task Team on Eskom has told the management at the power utility to expedite the fixing of the design defects at Medupi and Kusile power plants. Mabuza was responding to oral questions during a sitting of the National Council of Provinces. “From the onset, we must admit that Kusile and Medupi power stations have not achieved the desired levels of performance and reliability. This is due to a combination of operational, plant designs and maintenance inefficiencies. “In order to establish for ourselves the progress being made in correcting the identified challenges, which in the main, involve design defects of the power plant, as the Political Task Team on Eskom, we undertook an oversight visit to Kusile power station in May 2021. “We have stressed to the management of Eskom our stance that the defects identified at Medupi and Kusile power stations, must be corrected expeditiously to avoid further project delays and cost escalations,” he said. He added that Eskom is making progress in developing and implementing effective technical solutions to the major plant defects at both the plants, in line with the plant defect correction plan. Design defects at Medupi to be fixed by 2027Mabuza said as part of implementing the plan, the major design modifications at all units at Medupi have resulted in a substantial improvement in the availability and reliability of the commissioned units at the power station. He said the units now consistently achieve design output, with the exception of unit 4 – which suffered a generator failure resulting in a prolonged outage. “There are however, long-term modifications to the milling plant that will still need to be carried out when maintenance outages are scheduled. Similar modifications have been carried out at Kusile units 1 and 2, with unit 3 currently on a planned outage for design defect correction. “The timeframe for the completion of boiler plant defects solutions is October 2023 and corrections to the milling plant will be completed after December 2027, depending on the outage availability of units,” he said. Read: Expect electricity prices to double in the next five years, says former Eskom consultant